 This is an English lecture. The content is free. You should learn Spanish and speak English. Use the words in English. Please ask questions about English in English. The content is free. Use proper punctuation and capitalization. Use proper punctuation and capitalization. You should learn Spanish and speak English. Use proper punctuation and capitalization. Use proper punctuation and capitalization. Use proper punctuation and capitalization. Use proper punctuation and capitalization. Use proper punctuation and capitalization. but keep that into account lecture on Monday morning will always start at 8.30 since this door is kind of annoying if you come after 8.30 is fine but use that door instead so you go to the fourth floor and you can go to the second floor okay let me just check here if the recording is actually working so yeah Okay so everybody this is lecture one of the reinforcement learning course. It's gonna be an easy lecture. It's just gonna provide you some context for why reinforcement learning is relevant and some organizational aspects related to learning. So let me start with two questions. To save a little time I'll ask this question to myself instead of asking that to you. But yeah, we need to follow up at least that piece. So probably some of you already has an idea of what reinforcement learning is. I would just ask you to raise your hand if you have a rough idea of what reinforcement learning is. Some of you? Well, there's one of you that feels really brave to provide an answer to this question. Really quick. No brave people too early in the morning? Yes? There is an agent that interacts in the environment and the environment provides the rewards if it behaves correctly or negative rewards if it doesn't. It is correct. It would not have everybody else, this definition, but it is correct. Also my explanation is the same, but if I add something to it, feedback of the interaction between agent and requirement to improve the functionality ok so your colleagues are really technical they already have a rough idea of what enforcement learning is I will try to provide a more general explanation keep in mind when we talk about agents in this course that is nothing to do with AI assistant, agentic AI, those sort of things that you are more used to hear in other companies. Reinforcement learning more in general is a machine learning part. So if we take machine learning, we are a portion of machine learning. Someone can argue that reinforcement learning is an interdisciplinary topic and we are right to that, but let's simplify this part of reinforcement. If we're a reinforcement learning part, there are some characteristic. The first one is that we combine the learning and the long-term decision making, which is something that probably if you have seen machine learning courses, you would have never heard it before. And the important thing is that we do not necessarily rely on historical data sets. This is something completely new. If you have seen a machine learning class, you know that if you don't have a data set, if you don't have data, there is nothing for you in there. These topics is a little different. And closer to what your colleague was suggesting, we learn in the job. We interact with something that is outside of the machine learning system that is told in the environment, and we learn something on the way. So this was the difficult part. Of course I will expand on this later, but just be aware. Do you think that ever interacted with our reinforcement learning based systems or technologies? Any ideas? ... Recommender system. You are perfectly correct. Most of the recommender system are based on reinforcement learning based technology. actually the next lecture is going to be tomorrow on a really easy fluid that's called Bandit the playground of reinforcement learning it's really really easy as a framework and it's something that you use in order to use the reinforcement learning concept but it is something that we use in practice even if it's really easy and of course our combination systems are somehow able to do that we can expand a little bit Other answers? have you ever interacted with other first-time learning technologies that are not? yes, in charge of UT we should be doing the answers so we have to go out of time to do it you are correct, it was either of that to be fair, all the AI systems that we are using today there are maybe many components, but one of the most important components that you have in there, that was the basic experience that we use in the beginning, was the so-called reinforcement learning from human feedback, that was as suggested by your previous video, you are providing feedback to the AI tools that you are using. And basically based on those feedbacks, the rewards that you are getting, the feedback that you are getting, from the users helped the system to improve for it. It is bigger than that. In reality, none of us working in the community in 2022. We were aware of large . They were out there. There were many that were already open source. It was not surprising the presence of a large . They just sort of . What we were surprised of was the answer that we received from our first AI champion. surprised us. And they're still surprising us, in some ways, because they were able to provide a sort of longer conversation, not only answering my question, but being able to follow over time, in a sort of broader, more dynamic system. And moreover, what was interesting at the time is that they were able to provide a ethical question. So if you ask them to build up a bomb, they are already starting by suggesting that you probably don't know something that I should tell you and I'll tell you. Then we were able to somehow find a way. It's a disaster if you are interested. Now it's difficult, you don't take what you want. But we are using reinforcement learning from human feedback and we also use it to train for other activities like math, code. Some feedbacks are coming from exact check. So basically you try to tune, to build an AI system, and you build those systems based on real-world data. So you check if the code is actually working in real-world. You check if you have a verifiable component that tells you it's not sending out. So all of these, and you can read a lot about that, are some of an important component in this reinforcement learning part that we're seeing. Okay, so before diving in, so the goal of today is to expand on this. But before that I want to provide some organizational aspect on the course. I will say, sometimes I don't spend much time introducing myself, I will do of course a lecture on the course. That's probably what we do with you. I'm the coordinator of a group that's basically an AI machine learning tool. That's the name of the group. We do a lot of things, not only reinforcement learning, so we do other high-tech stuff, like anomaly detection, internal risk accountability, deep learning machine learning application, and other things that probably I forgot. We are highly involved with companies and industries, so for activities in collaboration with companies, we do many things. Not necessarily related to social learning, but more they are related to machinery. As for you, I will not be the only person involved in teaching this class. this class I would be doing most of the lectures. But I would be assisted by many TAs. was briefly here. I told him it was not necessary for him to come up in the morning. So he just left, basically. And then it was necessary for a teaching assistant to actually be there. He was a Google lecture probably this morning. So, trying to Mattel, who is the second teaching assistant that will provide the hardware for doing this class. you can see Matteo there, he went to South Korea a couple of weeks ago, and was able to basically bypass the security and get the official picture in the South Korean delegation so that you can write him in Italian and in English or in Korean if you reply to this call. And then there would be other indigenous systems, there would be many involved in some lectures that are research-related pan-sport reflection that will happen later in the course and then also the laboratories, we'll talk about optional laboratories later and also projects, and we'll talk about that later So if you are not sure if you fit in to this class, probably you do Over the past years, of course this course has offered computer systems engineering, computer engineering, S&T, data science But in the past years, people from physics of data, bio-engineering, something else, but astro students of course, computer science, so you probably will feel it if you don't see it yourself. Ask people what they probably will feel it. And yeah, so these are people that passed the exam, so they just not the 10 without success. In our lectures we plan to finish everything by the end of the year, before the end of December. Of course, if you got sick or something else that will not happen but we were able to do it in the past five years. So I'll try to do it this year. If you know about the NeuroPage, please, go to the NeuroPage because a lot of the content will be there. So it is important that you are there. sometimes you have to be patient. As I told you outside of the normal lecture hours there is going to be some programming laboratory they are completely optional but they are offered for two main reasons. One is that the exams later But basically, the exam is a theory exam for the mandatory part. There is an optional programming lab. So if you want to get higher grades, and I will explain about that later, attending this laboratory may help you a little bit to take the programming exercise. And also for educational reasons, because theory is nice, but if you see stuff in practice, you get more. So I think we are really, really good at this. So this is a rough program agenda of the laboratory. Both dates and groups have to be confirmed, because probably you are aware, in this department, there are not enough groups. So we need to wait a couple of weeks so that the people start to choose the courses they're actually in, so we know what is the capacity of the groups. and then we built one of our building. But for all of these it's gonna be those eggs and those pots, if you want to. Please, get on that. Really for the fade up, of course you know, yes please. – Can I ask about the model? The enrollment key is what? – That is supposed to be none, but that was my mistake. So I will make it open, and after that you will be able to run. So thank you for letting me. Thank you. Yeah, I will make it open so everybody can. As you know, classes are supposed to be attended in person. One of the good things the remind that we got after this attitude to be able to report yourself, to share your materials. I will do that. So I'm going to record now. Hopefully. So I'm going to record all of the nationals, will be recorded and they will be available after the lecture in a few hours. This is for many reasons for me it is useful, it is also explained by the lecturer. On the other hand there aren't any conflicts, so there's intelligent commodity results, there are other things so if you want to follow two different courses where you have conflicts you can for this course even if if you don't attend the class. I'm happy to attend the class of course but you can join also. Course material. The course materials are the slides, what we talked about, you know, the content that you see on the slides sometimes I will also tell you okay this is optional material even if it's not in the slide I will tell you that there is something that is advanced for many other reasons, but on general 95% of what you see in the slides is an example of this. Now, for us, we do have a really nice book that is like, you know, standard, the Bible of enforcement learning. It's called Reinforcement Learning by Sutton and Barton, who are two of the main researchers in the history of enforcement learning. they made a new edition of the book, it's not really what it was seven years ago, eight years ago... and it's really nice. We will follow the book especially for the first part of the lecture... of the course, like in a really systematic way. There are some things that are changing a little bit... and stuff will get a little bit more different after chapter 13, 14 because when we talk about... about people who functionally learn or some of the things. They get a lot of focus on linear models while they do get a lot of focus on other things, and other models. But, you know, for the beginning of the, for the first 12 lectures, more or less, I'm not following it really in a systematic way. And, you know, the book, you have different examples. You can get more profound explanations on the topics. So it's a really convenient thing. So, the book is for free, so you can download it from there. Of course, if you can afford it, you can buy it probably to support the authors, but it is for free. There are other references and I will provide additional material, but those are the two things that are really useful for the authors. Okay, the exam is a written exam. There is a part that is mandatory. You can weigh it up to 42, 43 depending on the exam. I feel it's something difficult going to be 53. It's going to be kind of easy to do 32 attempts. The exams is something that you will train following the lectures. Taking a look at the previous year's exams, there is a folder where not all of the exams are there but some are there with a solution so you can train with that you can also train by taking a look at the book the book has some questions at the end of each chapter and you can try to challenge yourself to see what is the question then, there is no solution available but you can ask an IEC stand to verify your solution and you can see if you get it right So the exams, you have the typical four exams already, the days, and so on and so forth. We also have two partials that unfortunately the only moment that I can do the partial are on Friday afternoon . So you can take most of the partials is in the beginning of the or middle of the sample. And you will get the grades before Christmas. Of course, you can take the second partial if you are sufficient in the first part. OK. There is one thing that is left there. even if this is related 32 or 43, the two partials are the equal weights. You can get up to 28. Why is that? because to verify that you really get the concept, I want to see something practical down to the problem with exercise. So there is also problem with . You can not do that. It's optional, but you know that you arrive after 28. OK. So this is optional. It is a project. There is a really complex algorithm. This is a course about libraries, so you get used to that. But the grade is really, really simple. You can take the algorithm there if you want. If you get a sufficient grade on the theory, then you can do the project and then you can put an average on the two parts of the programming and the theory part. OK. The theory part in that scenario will not be saturated. 28 would be or 31, 29, whatever grade you're taking there. I take the average. It is roundly double, so you're already lucky. But if you want to get our grade, you can take a look at the . OK. So a really important thing, I'm going to make a registration exams basically every month from March to September. You can register your grade in regular exams. If you do the project before and for some reason that you are doing a pre-study of grade before an available exam, that is going to be a registration exam. So it's going to be kind of flexible and basically you can do this project whenever you want. Not really, whatever you want. You can do the practical exam only if you have a sufficient grade on the theory. If you have a sufficient grade on the partial first, second, or following exam, you have time until the end of September of 2027. If you got the sufficient rate in the September exam of 2027, you can submit your project until the end of December of 2027. And I can assure you that there were some guys that on the 31st of December of the 11th in the day that they submitted a project. And it was respected with that . For me, if they were doing something other, they want to send an email. That's more fun. So let's see some examples, because this is really confusing. I got a lot of emails, many options. I hope this is reasonable for getting all of the kind of scenario. Perfect student, got the partial done, we had agreed before the second semester start, I'll only submit the project, and I at maximum grade. This guy really good grades in the partial, but for some reason, he got probably into Erasmus. Got really into Erasmus apparently. Does the project over the summer. It's going to be fun. OK? Other guy, too good for doing the project, so basically product 32, doesn't do the project, got a 20. OK? And as this guy must have done on this fourth kind of scenario, fourth exam, he submitted the project in December. He's fine. He's the only guy that can do it. The other guy has to submit it before . Yes. But if for the students of 3 and to the grade 30 over 32 without the project 42.2 would have been the final goal? I don't get the question, sorry. And if the students of 3 had the grade Length of 30 over 42. And, but if not, the probability of that. 28. Ah, not 47. 28. OK so it's around 32. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Maybe maxed. It's not reachable. Now the important thing about this is that you can decide later. So basically, he was not sure about if you want to create the project or not. So he waited, waited, waited for the signing. And he arrived to the end of the schedule and wrote me an email, I don't want to do the project anymore, for many many reasons. I go back to the grades that I got in January, that was the point of my return. Okay? Are we clear? Yes? Someone takes 32 out of 32 in the recent exam and then in the project takes something like 24. Yeah. Will the score be average or the minimum? I've seen a few projects that were really, really bad in 36 years. So don't submit a trash project but it will never happen. So in any case, in here, you have the written part as the minimum .. So you've got, what? You've got 28 in that case. Not for 2, because . Yes? Programming is part of the written exam? I don't really speak up. Programming is part of the written exam? No. The written exam is still. But it's a project. Promenade is promenade, so it's a project, yes. And the theory part is it's going to be algorithm as well. Directly question algorithm is going to be too low. I will not try to apply what you write on the answer. Yes. If we do a flash of the data in a lateral aspect, No, no, no. It's instead of the regular . OK. Are you feeling clear? Yes. OK. And what are the projects? So we're going to have two different types of projects. So one is the go standard project, by experience they take four, five, or ten days of work, or less. This year we're going to offer four or five standard projects. So we're going to talk a little bit about games, because games are fun on one side, and they're also easy to test and simple, cold-speak projects. So we're going to have a few types of games. First one, we're going to get a way to train a snake, a reinforcement learning agent to train a snake which hopefully you know what snake it is and don't make me feel like a clown or something. Then of course we have Viscola. I encourage foreign students that want to be in Italy after the master to do this protest so you can go to bar in Italy and be Italian grandparents. This band is a really interesting game. We have Ultimate Tic-Tac-Toe. So, you know Tic-Tac-Toe, this, whatever. Ultimate is a little bit more complicated because basically you play Tic-Tac-Toe on each of these square and the movements of your opponents It depends on where you put your growth or your strength. So it's really complex and a long-term strategy, which is something that we'll be able to push through. Then we have a good-looking Australian project. It's going to be followed by . And probably, if you confirm your server, this project will be . These are standard projects. They're going to be somehow easy. you're going to start with a base closure, you're going to have an environment there, so if you want you can choose anyone of these to decide. There's also going to be an advanced project, we'll talk about that later in the course, but if you are already working on something that you want to see how reinforcement learning works in the settings then we can talk about it, it is your own project, your own idea We can try to see if we can think about something in that sense. These are typically more challenging, so it's going to be more rewarding in many cases. In some cases, for example, we also have a thesis on reinforcement learning. So what we can do is that, my goal is to see that you are able, for the sake of this course, to see reinforcement learning in practice, what we have been done over the years is that make some intermediate results for the advanced project, and then do the thesis to follow that. So, if you are really into reinforcement learning, you're going to need a project, because we've already seen in the thesis or other stuff that you are actually able to do reinforcement learning in practice. These are really free. You can come up with some topics, or we will show you, especially in the later classes of the sources, the type of things that we are looking at. Yes? Do you have any experience of how Erasmus you send a project because my semester goes on until February and then I have to leave back to Germany. So how do I do that? It really depends. If you need to register a grade before you're going back to the summer semester, then my suggestion is to do something like this. You are part of the award. If you can register the grade later, which can happen, or I register the grades and I correct the grades, those kind of things that I don't have to do, but I delete them. And you can delete them afterwards. Are they individual projects? Like not group projects? so for the standard projects they are in vivo this is a pre-built project that we can talk in about two or three days but it's going to be a really good project this phase you can do it on your own they are great other questions? ok please write me an email don't call my phone to the office don't come to the office write me an email and hopefully yeah remember all the subjects so they go on the event folder and then of all the granular i'll try especially with the question that you have to answer the question in class because if you have a question probably something that is difficult that i did not explain really well so it's going to be beneficial for other people. They will be needing the next lecture if I could answer everybody, ok, Then of course, I typically speak near, after the lecture, before the lecture for questions, so I prefer to have additional questions this week. Yes? When do we include about if we want to do a project or not? Before the 30th of that's why 20-30%. Ok, every moment is possible. Yeah, we all have that. Before the grade, the grade that is... Yeah, what happens is that you pass an exam, ok? I will put 28, or whatever grade you want to get. If you have a bigger grade, I would put 28, send an email, and you'll have 31. And then you can refuse the grade, if you are not sure that you are going to get a points score. Then you take your time, wherever you wanna have a decision, You let me know, and you tell me, Professor, I submitted to, well, you submit the project to me, to the TAs, and I see that you're doing the project. And I register the grade to the project, and if you require me, I will help you to pass it. Or you can write an email, Professor, I decided not to do the project. Please register my grade and then next time call me. Registration, or however, I'm . so let me start here. so we can talk about reinforcement learning so let me start since we will be talking a lot about AI and now everybody has an opinion on AI, on the definition of AI I want to do my definition of AI under taxonomy of all the problems. So there are some of you that wants to provide a definition for AI and function learning and the difference between the two without taking a look at the next slide that I've already moved to. I will try to upload the slides always before the lecture. Sometimes last week changed the sixth edition of the course. So, I would not want to build this guy two days before or one day before because it may change my mind. But before that, I actually want to have this guy there. So, without taking a look at the last slide, this is actually the one that I want to provide a definition for AI, for machine learning. Let's make it quick. My definition of AI has nothing to do with intelligence, not with intelligence, not necessarily. So, a machine, the beginning, a human system, is an artificial intelligence. It doesn't need to be AI chatbot, it doesn't need to be really intelligent, but the definition of AI is a machine that read the case what we do. So really basic things can go into that machine. The difference with AI machine learning, machine learning is a subset, is that machine learning does that with the availability of it. More importantly, another subset of machine learning is deep learning. How many of you have taken a deep learning class? For the others, don't worry. I will talk a lot about deep learning in the later part of the course. It's going to be useful only for programming exercise, but I will provide probably optional lecture of basics of deep learning that's going to be useful for doing the programming exercise. You can do the programming project without learning, but it's going to be easier to do it learning, and it's going to be more satisfying. Nevertheless, you know, learning is a particular set of machine learning machines that are kind of effective in many, many settings. And also reinforcement learning tool they have been used nowadays but none of those. So, those two, they make use of data and data will be an important thing we will discuss today and later in this course. So, I will move forward to this group, to say some comments. So one of the things, I want to know, is there someone that has never taken a machine learning class before? OK. So let me go back. So you can attend this class, don't worry. If you're doing machine learning . You can attend. There are other concepts that are really useful to be classed, like basic algebra. It'll be probably much more useful than machine learning. But basically, Sorry, we have the recording stopped for a while. Ok, you should be recording and you should see it. So, this is a machine learning tool. We really really simplify things. We use data that come from the real world to describe the phenomenon in a mathematical way, and thanks to this data we build some machines that are able to make predictions. We are able to classify the color or if he has a defect or not. We are able, for example, voice, to do segmentation of some images and videos. And most of the things and of course, even our system and other stuff. So typically, even if we talk about AI chapels, specializing with the system of things. We are used to the GPD, close, and so forth. It seems to do everything. They cannot drive a car. Probably they can if you allow them. But, you know, typically we have gone for a lot of machine-run solutions that do stuff. So really specific things. So one of the things, and using as an example, Then for those of you that don't have a machine learning background, if you want to be at the end of the lecture, come to me and I'll provide some suggestion, but you can follow the class without any 2 points. For those of you that already see machine learning in action, what you can get in machine learning solutions is that you have prediction. So for example, in autonomous driving, one of the most useful machine learning tools that you have in there is the part that does the perception. It does take a look around from images, videos, lightbar, other stuff, other sensors the machine has, and try to understand what is the setting around the machine. what is the road, if there are other cars, if there are pedestrians, or whatever you have in the car. That is fundamental. If the car doesn't see what is happening, doesn't have the perception stuff, you don't have autonomous driving, okay? And that is true in many, many senses. So what we have in many scenarios, in many machines and solutions, is that we do have perception. If I don't see, for example, I don't see what is happening, if I'm not able to hear what a person is saying, I cannot read back to the analysis. But typically what you are seeing happening now are tools that classify, segment, make predictions, and so on and so forth. That is not enough. So for example, in the case of the autonomous private parliament and many other cases, we need to make decisions. We need to make long-term decision or medium terms. So for example, we have the reception. We know in the car what is around the car, what is the department. And we know that we want to go from point A to point B. But we need to make longer decisions. the goal if I write it in a post-function is I want to go from A to B in the last possible time but probably without killing myself or killing other people is a rather important constraint that I have to put in my function so do I pass this card in front of me that is throwing me down or not? this is the decision that in the short term is gonna make it's gonna make me wait I decided to stay behind the car, but probably in the long term it's a better decision because I'm not going to risk my life and not . So we need to include that planning, control, decision making to what we see, what is the outcome of a regular supervised machine learning solution. And you see, this is one of the limitations of other machine learning tools that probably use in other classes. Typically, in other classes, probably you need a little bit of supervised learning, like we did clustering, and that's probably. But there are lots of scenarios where supervision is basically not enough to cover many settings. So typically, in the supervised settings, I have historical data. I throw those data into a machine. And if you meet second, whatever , or hours, days, if you really need architecture, I got a machine that is really specializing with whatever I've got. Sorry about this. An connection, again, is lost. I'm probably in the chat room as well. Yeah. Oh, no, no. and a long network is always really stable. Okay. I move on and probably we'll upload the last year recording, first lecture every year, because there was some technical problem. Hopefully we'll be able to restart the same recording. That is not working. Nevertheless- Nevertheless, these settings are... sorry about that. So this sentence, having historical data you throw it into a machine and then you are fine, you are already an expert If I have to make an analogy, I like movies analogies, I would love to do this lecture It's really close to the Matrix movie, better be a free Matrix movie, some people think it's a force movie, but it's not Basically what happens in a movie is that you throw the main character, basically you see some data coming from martial arts, so on and so forth, he steps into a machine for five minutes and after five minutes he is a kung fu expert. And this is really also what supervised learning does. You became expert on one topic because you have the ability of experience on one side. And you have phenomenal capabilities of learning something. This is not what happened in many learning centers. When we develop machines and algorithms that learn from data, from experiences, we try to mimic humans because the way that humans learn is a way, some strategy that can inspire us to build similar machines. And what happens is that in 99 seconds we need to collect data into the web, so we need to collect the real world experience for many, many reasons. Because even if you watch something, all of us would be, probably most of us would be, experts in football and our national team, we don't have some problems. But just watching something does not provide you with the experience, it's not the true data that you need to learn something. Your muscle needs to learn something. You just don't need to see. You need some feedback that come from the fact you fail many times. You get a ,, . You need different types of data to learn something about that. And this is something that reinforcement learning tries to cover in different settings. So we have many mutations in supervised learning. That's the reason why I'm teaching reinforcement learning and many, many people are using reinforcement learning in practice is that data are not available, There are not the right data, they are not available. Nobody is giving us data. The data may not be associated with the real instruction that we need to cover. That our machine needs to be done. But we can add some rewards. I failed to get a kick, I scored a hole, I got a table, what's that? Those are that I would call . at the end of the day. But the nature of this data are not exactly like the observation that we get, the rules that we get in the data . So they are really really different. And then one of the things that we forgot, typically, when we do supervised learning, the last we sequential learning, is that data, in the real world, time matters. So if you get a supervised learning task, you get your images or your observation, you can't permanentate the observation, you can't permanentate the images, nothing changes. If you provide observation 1 at time 1, an observation 10 at time 10, or the other way around if there are on the training set nothing changed but in many many set is times matter so we don't have IoT data we still have time but we need to take into account the sequence of our data so in many many settings this supervised learning does not happen not at the time but we don't have a long term decision making the machine is in the studio now typically it doesn't take into account what you want to create. The first learning step does that. And we do have some elements. I will enumerate those elements. And I will see them in practice to show you how these elements interact, what is they make. So we do have agent in this contest which is similar. For what you have to study in AI channels and so on and so forth, agent is an entity, some sort of a major training that is a solid customer. So it is the intelligent part. We need to make it intelligent somehow. This agent within a set of states. For those of you that are coming from control system engineering or have taken a class in control system, the state here is the same concept of state that you have in control. So it is a set of information that define the condition in which your agent is. So the velocity of whatever task you have in mind, what is around me, what I am seeing in the perception. It is a set of quantities that define where the agent is, physically or metaphorically. Describe the agents at that point. There is a set of states that are reasonable. A car can be everywhere. You don't need to formalize the problem where the car is on the moon. We formalize the problem with a set of states that make sense for finding that problem. Now we define the self-reaction, what the agent can do. If you're talking about a car, you slowly down, speed network, go left, right, see a steer, so on, so forth. And that self-reaction can depend on the state. If I'm really close to a wall, I cannot go right anymore. So my state move forward or left. So depending on my state, the set of options can be different over time. And then there is everything else. Everything that is not the agent, everything that is outside of agent is the so-called environment in this sentence. In the case of the autonomous driving, The condition of the road, the pedestrians, the weather, so on and so forth. This is everything else that is not under the control of the agent. The car cannot change the weather because it prefers to have some weather, so on and so forth. This is everything else where the agent does not have the agency to change. The environment, there is this setting. You see there is a really good loop in this SQL that I will use many, many times. Because I'm going to do a sort of decision making and action many, many times. The agent decides to go right and correct the environment, the rest of the world, providing me with our world, okay, we went in the right direction probably. And the next thing, I'm not here anymore, now I'm here. and this loop goes over and over and over again, until we reach the activation. We will see this many, many times. The concept is going to be clear, and that will give a standard effect. I will give some examples. There may be a policy, or so as an end. There comes the concept. An agent could be interesting in long term rewards, not in short term situations. I don't care about the coming era, I care about how I know the world's like. Okay, moving terms, second movie reference. Our first movie, Settlings, can be seen in many, many movies. But basically there are many movies, probably the first and most famous one was Grand Old Day, that for some strange reason it was made with the recommendation of Apple. It was an old movie, I will say that, where basically the main characters go back over and over and over to Earth. So there is a loop also in this case to live again the same days. So in this case, the mythical Bill Murray is a journalist and is a really cynical person, and he is obligated to go and make a report in the countryside about a really strange event. It's the whole day in the town. He's taking a look at their . If he's screaming or not, that is the sign that there's going to be a battle with something that really, really doesn't like to be there, but he's stuck in there. So he's living over and over again the same day. And he's never starting every other morning, leaving the same day . The good part of that is that the agent The agent has a goal in this case. The agent is Bill Mori, the main character. He needs to learn something. He has two objectives, one that is known to him, that is making the other character, made by Andy McDowell, truly love him. And the second one that is implicit is to became a better person. He's a really similar person at the beginning of the movie. The good part is that he's becoming a better person. So over and over again, this sequence that the agent is doing some actions, it goes to different state in some , is basically trying to make the eta, the kind of . And of course, it's not an easy, it's not something where you have instruction, how to make another person . So he's tried very strategically, he's tried to . He's tried to be really stupid with the funding. And over and over again, he's tried to learn what is the best way to make the character for the novel they are reading about in better things, also a way to become a better person . So in these settings, and in the towel, the memory for the agent, the difference action different choices that he makes within the day are reaction and that's a different statement can be the location that they are can be the mood of the other person so on and so forth and everything else is the environment other the other character, the town the people in the town whatever else is in the environment the body doesn't have agents During his experience, he collects data to see that the other character is engaging with them, also see the people in the town if they are nice or not, and in that way he maximizes the reward. But he's not maximizing that it's not the other character that says I'm really loving you. He sees some smiles, sees some engagement. So there are partial data that are collected from the client. Okay, so this is one Enforcement Learning agent and let's see some other Enforcement Learning agents in action. This is a famous toy example by OpenAI. So this is a game where you basically have two agents. There are the one in the right. In reality, the other two are two different agents, but let's focus on the one in the right. They are playing I will seek. They have no idea how I will seek work. They have no idea that if the blue agent is in Lost World. And so, no, he's the blue character, sorry. The blue character is the agent that doesn't need to be seen, and the red character is the agent that's seen the other agent in order to use the game. They have no idea how it works. They like to just see that they die because the game is or once they are seen. So after a while you make them play and they learn strategies, there are long term strategies. So for example, the blue guys, they have no model about the environment, there is not written what they need to do but they realise they don't die if they are not seen in some ways. So they develop a strategy, where basically they move around objects they are not seeing war but unfortunately the reinforcement learning is available to everyone they are really democratic and also the red guys they are a reinforcement learning agent they see that they don't need them so they devise a strategy like for example when they are able to overcome obstacles like in this case but the good part is that the reinforcement learning guys they learn about the fact that it's not enough for them to be sheltered they need to also take out the ramp So as you see here, they are learning something about the game. So the blue agents there, they don't have the same experience of the blue agent here. So they have no idea that they . But everything happens by interacting with the real world. And the really important thing is that they have no idea. They have no description of a model of the environment. So we'll come back to this later. But there are model-based, model-free approaches in reinforcement learning. We will talk about model-free. And we'll become mathematically clear later what I mean by that through my selection. But basically, we don't have a description of the environment. We don't have a clear function that tells me what I need to achieve. How do I get to the words? Those sort of things. So the agent is among these subjects. They ask to move around, they ask to find a way to solve the problem, to see that he gets the goal, not dying or making the other guy be seen in this case. And also, as I told you, the reinforcement learning agent will be able to maximize long-term achievement. term achieved. So, for example, if you are familiar with chess, there are somehow rules that tells you, okay, you find a good shape if you take out a lot of pieces of your opponent, if you get the right pieces, if you take out the queen, the tower, so on and so forth, it is a good thing. But in reality then there are other things like controlling the center, a lot of other things. but in reality it is not your end goal, your end goal is to take out the king of Europe it's the only things that make you win a game or lose a game so if you see, if you are taking a look at the white guy starting from here he is sacrificing a lot of pieces so in the short term I am losing pieces it doesn't seem like something good but in reality you are sacrificing first the bishop and the answer to finally win is really win the game. So the short term losses are long term achievement. And this is what we want to achieve with reinforcement learning. Be able to make long term decisions, not just some gains that we get. OK? So what is reinforcement learning to summarize that? So it's somewhat complex, because with reinforcement learning, we mean several things. It is both the area of research, so all the areas that devise algorithm for being able to construct these agents are . So it's our area. So it is the where we try to both somehow optimize, control, and decision making, and on the other side learning something about . So here we want to know that we are losing or winning the game, if we see or if we're not able to receive the other guys. But we don't just care about that. We want to be able to devise a policy, to devise a strategy that allow us to beat the game, to achieve our goals. More practically speaking, I will talk a lot about games, but we use enforcement memory in practice . and as I told you there are many many technologies that are based on reinforcement learning by itself they do have there is an LM there, there are a lot of other components but the reinforcement learning parts down with the human or down with very bad, very fire where it works, is there in the unit of components we do have a lot of autonomous agents so let's see if I switch the computer and I was able to actually go back to the video probably not. But you see that there are a lot of physical agents like drones, autonomous driving I recommend you to take a look at the videos that I suggest to you here. We do have a drone laboratory in our group it is not as nice as the one that you see from the Tariqs Ghannoussa. They are doing amazing things recommended to take a look at this video they took their students another examples are for example they show in Berkeley this is a research group that they're doing robotics with this robot they just have legs and basically this is not the standard way to train a robot because you do have physical models behind it but you can take a look at in the studio basically the PhD students there started making the robot learn how to walk from scratch without the joints or the cinematic and anything there. So they were canning around the robots like a baby for the millions. So not a great group of PhD students I would say. But nevertheless it is a funny way to see how you learn from scratch like a baby and someone that is able to walk. So I recommend you to . Another thing, I'm skipping this one. But I want to show you this. My favorite. No. Yeah. You always have lost. And it's . So what I'm showing you is something called a deep mind. A deep mind is one of the most important entities that has been dealing with the reinforcement learning which by the way is called Alphaphone, they won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry, because they were able to devise a software, not based on what they learned, it's called Alphaphone, that is able to synthesize the 2D form of proteins, which is something that was done the first game was done by researchers, now it's for free for everybody but one of the things that they did earlier was to build these sort of Atari games Atari are really old things, they are old games for me I think they are history for me basically they were these games that are small, really really easy one of these games was called Breakout and the game break out basically your goal is not to win the world four and to destroy all the bricks that turn in there so this is our reinforcement learning agent with ten minutes of training you see he is really really bad so he is losing a lot of the games so he has no idea he just sees that he is losing he has no idea about the game, what is his goal He discovered that the game. After two hours of playing, this guy is like this. So the reinforcement learning, allowing to learn what he has to do and so on and so forth. The interesting thing is even the developer of this game, they were not used to play Atari because they were younger than other people's. After four hours of training, the reinforcement learning where the agent discovered a strategy that was not known by the developers. Let me think about what is the strategy here. An idea. There it is. So we tried to make a hole in there. And basically by doing that, it takes much less time to be in the way. And it was nice because the strategy was not known by the developer. But nothing was given to them from the very beginning. You too. Could be worse. Could be much worse. An additional element that Matteo is a nice person. Take a look at the history. It's like you can see the soul of . Nevertheless, games are really, really nice because you can play around and understand something about what our reinforcement learning pilot is doing. And we will use that because it is an easy playground to understand some aspects of reinforcement learning. And we are doing, reinforcement learning is working on much, much longer scale, not an experiment, it's just reporting. We're using real world settings, industrial settings as well. So for example, probably you are not aware of that most of the more, that between the most important, most famous companies that who are around the part of the area of Padua. So we work a lot with people that they for chillers and for systems and so forth, for data centers, for huge buildings. there is and basically, you improve the contours strategies tools and we typically have these also things. You use it on financial settings. Of course, machine learning in general, historically, the best success in achieving advertising, system, of course we use and we will see something even tomorrow on the panel structure we will see how to cover online advertising on the television system. We use it in healthcare, for example we worked a lot with the Bioengineering Group for improving the famous artificial contrast we will force it there in settings and we will have to use it there ok I will skip a little bit of things just to arrive something really to the end of the lecture a little bit of history of reinforcement learning reinforcement learning is not new, ok? many many results and as you see this is one of the two authors of the book Yes? May I ask you a question on the previous slide? yes even the time is not a nice was suggested to us because it's going to happen in a long time. Please, you can talk about that later. OK. OK. History of reinforcement learning is really happy to interrupt it. So as a general rule for the course, of course in general, interrupting it, doing a deep dive of what we are seeing there If you have time you can talk about something that we'll talk about later but today we don't have much time. But in general, asking questions, referred to as ask questions, in classes, so anybody can hear it and again we'll provide the solutions that they should probably have. So as I was saying, history of reinforcement learning is not one or two authors of the book is one, the founding father of reinforcement learning, I think it's not a young person, he has no quality, but he's not going to do any more. You can take a look at that video. It's really nice. That's a little bit of the history of reinforcement learning. I like to meet everybody. Then we got huge advancement in learning architecture, and we revised all of the items that were there. We were able to apply in practice larger problem, more complex problem, and I'm going to show you a little bit of this in another course as well. So a breakthrough moment in Reinforcement Learning was the famous alpha group. So this happened ten years ago, not that long ago. Basically, up until those years, there were games and tasks in general that we thought were not possible to be beaten by a machine. So for example, in the late 90s, we We are able to beat the best player in the world in chess. But chess is easy. You compare it to go. What is go? Go is a really popular board game. It's really popular in the far east part of the world, in Korea, in China, in Japan. And that is much, much more complex than chess. I try many times to understand how it works. I keep up, because it's complex for me. but you have to compare territories at the end of the day. What I can understand is this, that the size of the game, the number of states of the game, is much, much bigger than what chess has. So if chess, you complicate it to you, gold is order of magnitude more complicated. It's like comparing some sand with a wheel of ore, for example. that comes from the past So nobody thought it was possible to do that until some people started it people from DeepMind, again the same people that won the number prize that I showed you that they won, they were able to beat Atari games they developed this software that is called Alphamore that was able to beat this really famous player Pauliste Dabla which the players of Go are not even considered humans in that world. They are considered gods, or entities, by those people here, because playing the game is crazy. And this was like a huge game, so they were showing the games, the live streams of the games during the pinpoints, with DreamWorks, and so on. They were like 200 million people They were trying to make people watch the game live. And at that point, the machine hit the human. So there is a really nice documentary you can find on YouTube that is called AlphaGo. You will understand nothing about that, unfortunately, if you watch the documentary. But it's really nice if you want to see there a really deep think about a topic that is really hot at the moment, which is the relationship between the human and the machine. So if you allow the machine to beat the human, it is a bad thing. On the other hand, the machine is beaten by the human, so you may have a completely different opinion on that. So I recommend it, but it is not for the use of the virus. And then there are many new things. Of course, except for being the other breakthrough and being revolutionary in the life. Trying to answer that question, it's hard of course in many scenarios to come up with environments where you can have experience, large experiences, the good thing is that you can combine for example, syntactic environment where you know something about the program then you develop a first stage where you need less experience on real world data. You will need experience, so you know your first tournament, but you cannot start from from structure to surface, you start from the environment. The good thing is that in the past 10 years, many, many environments are there, so you can play games, you can try to develop things into robots and so forth. So there are a lot of good environments. So basically providing an outline of the course. We will arrive at the state of the art. So we will arrive to see the algorithms that are using practice at the end of the course, OK? So it's going to be theoretical. And especially at the beginning, I'm going to need some fundamentals, math, and equation, and settings, and frameworks. But we will arrive to state of the art. Probably, on principle, if you know reinforcement learning, you can train your own AI, I will not but I'm going into that from scratch. Well, I'm basically running the theory. So we're going to cover, and this is going to be probably most of the part is going to go on the first part of the first part of the book. We will go from Tabra Mittels first. And it's going to be really close to what you find in the book. And then later, we will scale up. So after the first partial, going to take a couple of lectures after the first part of the shot, but we're going to move from simple settings to how to take that and to scale it up to large-scale products, okay? So half of the course probably is going to be a little less than that. Deep learning approaches will be used, but that will be not part of the direct part. I will provide you more detail. So this is tentative. The course is six years during the course but every year I have changed everything something, so this is tentative again. So, I anticipate you that to arrive to the reinforcement learning set up that we have seen today is gonna take me a few lectures. So it's not going to be the next lecture. is going to be on the third week of the course. So, for me, we start to see the scenario that I described today. But before that, I need to lay it down on the ground with simplified settings in order to arrive to that set. But for me, almost, we're going to see that I'm able to do . Here, in the second part of the course, course .. So you have to be patient if you want to try to do something in practice until we arrive. And then we will talk a little bit about the learning and the class topic. Those things, so from the problem apart from popular and circulator, they are general knowledge. It means that what you have seen today ought to be seen in the last few lectures of the course Something that we would not be evaluated upon. Unless you do a thesis or something. And also, a deep reinforcement learning part. It is not something that I would ask in the theory of this class. I would ask for information, whether I use the learning or not. You will see that later. But I will not be part of the theory. So if you have not done a deep learning class before, I would not ask for deep learning theory on this course. It doesn't exist. Okay? But these will be beneficial option, still, but beneficial if you're doing a programming test or something. Okay? Okay. I wasn't able to squeeze that in. I'm finishing it in the area. So in general, we start on Monday at 8.40 and we finish at 10 past 10. I am always doing this without a brace. And then I will fix. On Tuesday, instead, we start at .. And we finish at 2. OK? Any questions? OK. No questions? We'll see you in town tomorrow.