 Sorry, today there is no lecture, and there is no lecture also next Tuesday. I will advertise you of course through the eLearning page. In any case, counting the lectures that we have, we should be able to conclude our class by the end of May. So, that's it. Okay. Today, let's continue with our discussion about the Jacobian interaction matrix and then the development of the resource I will talk about. So, this is what we are going to do today. Let me write just a reservation that we started with this set of slides in the last lecture. So basically what we have here is a relation between velocities, and we know that when we have a relation about velocity, the mathematical object that we need to introduce to describe this relation is a Jacobian. Here we have a relation between the velocities which is only a feature vector velocity by which this vector is changing in the image plane with respect to the relative velocity between object and camera so you have an object, typically in our context this object is not moving you have your camera moving so there is a relative velocity because the term is the fact that the feature vector is changing. So you have your object, you have some important points on this object. You project these points in the image plane so you have your feature vector and while moving the camera with respect to the object, the position of the feature is changing the image plane. It's quite clear. so we have the relation between the velocity by which the feature vector changes over time and the relative velocity between the object and the camera just a moment, this relative velocity is expressed with respect to the camera of course now the problem is that of the terminal this image is obvious ok? Before entering directly into the Isacoglian, actually what we did was a bit of calculations, okay, to write the relation between S dot and the absolute velocity. The absolute velocity of the object and the camera. So we try to write the relation between S dot and the absolute velocity. so the absolute velocity of the object, the absolute velocity of the camera expressed with respect to the camera why this is interesting? Because really often this absolute velocity of the object is equal to 0 because we assume that the object is not moving, ok? so it makes sense to look to this relation because typically in many applications the relation that we have is between s dot and d cis Is that okay? So we manipulate it a bit through standard . We did some manipulations to get this result. Do you try to verify this? No. Please try to do that a little more. Ok? Maybe it could be an exercise. Try to verify it. It is a good exercise. Ok? You can cough in the water. So, we did all these calculations and by the end what we get was this other relation. When we introduce a new matrix. This interaction matrix, okay. Notice that now we are exactly the relation between S dot and the absolute velocity of the object and the camera. Okay. Here we have still the images of copia. Here we have the interaction matrix whose expression is given here in the slide, which is the multiplication by the image of the tober by these gamma matrix therefore we know the structure ok, so we should know the structure of gamma gamma is this matrix, this block matrix here we have a Q-symmetric matrix built over a vector ok, the vector here is this O-C vector So what is this vector? It's the vector joining the original of the camera frame with the original of the object frame whose coordinates are written with respect to the camera frame. Is that okay? Why we like this expression? Because typically in practice and now in the first part of this lecture, we will do exactly this exercise. it's simpler to compute this matrix rather than this. Okay? And so what we do this morning is to compute, Ciao, to compute these Ns matrix. And since the gamma matrix is only invertible, only is it vertical, why? we stress this fact what are the values of the gamma matrix? minus one six eigenvalues equal to minus one so this is vertical remember if the matrix is in vertical there is at least one and that means it is equal to zero but since here all the eigenvalues are equal to minus one it means that the matrix is vertical so So computing the version of this matrix you can get also the images appropriate. Ok, this relation is also interesting for another reason, because I stress the fact that really often the velocity, the absolute velocity of the object is equal to zero, the object is not moving, which means that this velocity is equal to zero, so we don't add these and we are left directly with this relation. The interaction matrix in some sense is the Jacobian describing mid-relation between the s. velocity and the absolute velocity of the camera expressed with respect to the camera frame. Ok, let's try to compute the interaction matrix in a particular case, which is the case where the factored vector refers just to a point This is how we can compute the interaction matrix in practice, which is the knowledge that we need then to develop the results that I'm going to talk about. Let's try to go slow in deriving the interaction matrix for a point. so what is the situation that's the discussively What we are doing? we have a point here in our object whose position is been with respect to the basic frame okay you have your camera moving this point is constant so the coordinates intersect the base but also the coordinates in respect to the object frame are constant for this point We want to determine this relation. In particular, we want to compute the interaction matrix. In the case, the feature vector is composed just by a point. What is the dimension of Ls if the feature vector is composed just by a point? If we have just a point, the dimension of the s vector is equal to 2. we have just the normalized coordinate of this point which means that since this is a velocity in terms of positional orientation of course this is a 6th dimensional vector, this is a 2 dimensional vector and S will be a matrix which will be 2 by 6 ok let's compute together let's compute together so So, RC is this vector, it is the vector joining our point to the origin of the frame, actually it is the vector joining the origin of the camera frame to the point here. Let us now write the coordinates of RC with respect to the camera frame. First of all, is it clear to everyone that RC, when I write RC, I suppose that I am considering the coordinates of RC with respect to the base frame. From standard and standard considerations, we have that RC is equal to equal to the vector P minus the vector OC, OK? But if I write that P, sorry, that RC is equal to P minus OC, I am writing the coordinates with respect to the basic frame. Now I want to write the coordinates of RC with respect to the camera frame, so what we need to do, as usual, to write that RCC is equal to R C multiplied by P minus of C. So since I don't have the subscript, I refer to the base frame. So here with this rotation matrix, I'm accounting exactly for the relative orientation between the base frame and the camera frame. So in this way, I'm writing the coordinates of a C exactly with respect to the camera frame, okay. Here, I use this trick that instead of writing R with a subtle script C, I write R with a sub script C, but I need it to take the transverse. we know that this is a something in relation. Is that clear to everyone? We have already used. We are a bit sleepy this morning. I know it's a tough material but it's tough because it's too early in the morning. If I do it on Wednesday or Thursday, it's too late. is this relation clear? ok so if you take the inverse of a matrix you have to flip the sub with the superscript but the inverse is equal to the transpose ok? ok nice maybe S is the vector with the normalized coordinates of the point B let's have a listen about the coordinates the normalized coordinates there is a way to compute this with respect to the coordinates of RCC Let's discuss this point. So, the coordinates of the point RCC are these xc, yc, zc okay according to the perspective transformation okay if you remember we have seen that the coordinates f f y f this was the first coordinate that we introduced these were the coordinates of the point in the image plane according to the perspective transformation we saw this relation if you remember where f is the focal length. I'm not going to reopen the slide that you had. But when you project this where the relation. Actually here you can add the sign minus, it depends if we are considering that the image plane is behind or ahead the origin of the lenses. the origin of the length and so on when we consider the normalized coordinates if I remember I told you in this case these are the coordinates that I get if I assume that the focal length is equal to one so you can assume that f is equal to one and you get the normalized coordinates ok So if you look at this elevation, since S in our case, as we assume a few lectures ago is the feature vector. Well, I get the normalized coordinates, X and Y. If you look, of course, X and Y, depends on the coordinates of our point P with respect to the camera frame. and in particular I can write this elevation. It comes directly from this right-hand. I can write that the features of my cone with respect to my point P, which are the coordinates are exactly given by this elevation. Is that okay? So take the perspective transformation, put the focal length equal to one, and you get the direct matrix ok now what we need to do is to take the time derivative of this object I want to compute the interaction matrix ok so what I want to compute is the interaction matrix let's take the time derivative derivative. To compute the time derivative, what we do is as usual, to resort to the chain of Ruhle. First of all, F take the derivative since S depends on RCC, which are the coordinates of the point P with respect to the camera frame. First of all, that will take the partial derivative of S with respect to the vector RCC then let me multiply this by the time The real material of the vector RCC. Is the standard chain root. What is the meaning of computing these? We need a proof of Chokes' algorithm and the meaning of performing these calculations. This is a Jacobian with respect to the components of RCC. RCC, let's do all this calculation in all the details s is a two-dimensional vector according to what you have learnt In calculus 102 we've got, of course, x and y are both function of RCC, the coordinates. When you write the partial derivative of x with respect to RCC, what you have to compute partial derivative of s with respect to x c the partial derivative is solid x has two coordinates so here you have the partial derivative of big x with respect to x c partial derivative of big x with respect to y c the partial derivative of x with respect to z c is the same as here Is that okay? So it's a 2x3 matrix. The dimension of x is 2, the dimension of xc is 3, so this Jacobian is a 2x3 matrix. But here we have the expression of xc as a function you have the derivative of xz, right? So all of these partial derivatives is something that you know how to compute, right? What is the partial derivative of capital X with respect to xz? So, it's equal to one over zc. The partial derivative of x in respect to yc is equal to zero. There is no yc. The partial derivative of capital X with respect to zc is equal to minus xc over zc squared. That is good. Right. So, if you do all the calculations, the expression that you get from this term is exactly this. I leave 2U to verify. What is interesting is that here you can explore the fact, I mean, that XC over ZC is capital X, okay. Here, you explore that that relation between YC and ZC is capital 1. So, this is the relation for this matrix. So first piece has been completed. Now we need to compute rcc dot. Is everything clear so far? Let's proceed with rcc dot. We are moving towards computing these interaction metrics. remember that this matrix is 2 by 6 here we have for the moment 2 by 3 we need to see how we move toward the 2 by 6 matrix ok let's take the time derivative of RCC remember that RCC according to the previous relation that we derived is equal to this is RCC transpose multiplied by P minus RCC We have derived just five minutes ago, right? So, let me take the time derivative of this expression exploiting the fact that P is constant. So, let me leave RC transpose multiplied by the time derivative of this, which is what? Minus OC dot. So, we have minus RC transpose OC dot plus, here I should put RC transpose dot multiplied by this. Right? we have already verified after some calculations that RC dot transpose multiplied by P minus OC can be rewritten in this way there was a similar calculation to be verified by you some lectures ago. So we need those calculations and we get exactly this relation. Is that ok? So let's go ahead. It is really interesting, what I have here. Extremely interesting. because let me write some additional evidence some additional evidence What is the absolute velocity of the camera? is given by Oc. what is Oc? vector joining the region of the base frame or the region of camera frame. So OC dot provides me the translational velocities of the camera. Here what I have is the angular velocity vector referring to how the camera is instantaneously changing rotation. But since I want to write this absolute velocity of the camera with respect to the camera frame, what I do is to pre-multiply by R C transpose, as usual. Okay? So, if you know this, what you have here is exactly this vector. What you have here is exactly the second part of this vector. So, you can rewrite in compact way that R C C dot is exactly equal to this matrix minus the density the skew symmetric matrix built over the vector RCC by ECC is that ok? I like a lot this because look, if you replace RCC dot with this relation we have S dot here and when you replace this with this relation at the end here you have exactly ECC which is exactly provides me the relation that I want to have between S dot and VCC ok of course what I need to do to complete the job is to multiply this matrix which is 2 by 3 by this matrix which is 3 by 6 together ok? so let me write the blackboard so you can follow all that S dot is equal to 2 by 3 matrix by 3 by 6 matrix what do you have here? this is ok this is equal to partial derivative of x rcc with respect to rcc and here what we have is minus identity here x rcc ok Let's play with the dimension just to convince ourselves that we are in the right direction. The dimension here is 2 by 3. The dimension here, notice that here you have a minus identity, is 3 by 3. This is the skewsymmetric matrix built over the vector RCC. It's again a three-dimensional matrix. So you have here a 3 by 6 matrix. when you compute the product between these two matrices what you have is exactly the interaction matrix which is exactly a two by six matrix is that okay so the last step the last step consists exactly in computing the product between between these and these matrix. Now I leave to you to do the calculations. In place of RCC write XC YC ZC. Do all the calculations and where it is possible, where it is possible, explore the fact that capital X is equal to XC over ZC. Capital Y is YC over ZC. And by the end you get this expression. How to compute the interaction matrix? We need the normalized coordinates of the point capital X capital Y but notice that it is a function of also an additional element which is Z . What is Z? It's the delta of Z. is the third coordinate of the point P with respect to the camera frame. How to compute this? By manual measurement? No, we have seen an analytical way to compute the relative pose of the frame But in this way you can get also the third coordinate of the point P. Okay? If you remember, we have seen an analytical way to compute the relative pose between the reference frame of the object with respect to the camera frame. Alright? I told you there are also numerical algorithms that allow viewing in real time to compute is quantity but since the point P is solid with the reference frame of the object once I get the knowledge of the relative pose between the object frame and the camera frame I can get really easily also the third coordinate of the point P because the coordinates of the point P in the frame of the object are constant so we are done ok so in some sense to compute these interaction metrics. What they need to have is a combination of information coming from the normalized coordinates, which are the coordinates whose information you can get measuring the pixel coordinates as we have reason to get them, plus some information coming from a three-dimensional We know how to do that, we have seen a powerful algorithm that as soon as you have four points coplast, where no triplet of these points are collinear, we can get exactly the relative pose between the object and the time. Is that ok? OK, here we want to get the image. Now what we do is to compute this. Here, we add the version. Let's go here just a second. so, just a comment about that if I want to have the image Zapovian from there you have that image Zapovian is equal to Ls gamma inverse I'm just inverting this elevation, we know that the Gamma matrix is in value. Gamma is a 6 by 6 matrix, so the dimension of the interaction matrix is of course the same. So Gamma is a matrix which depends on this vector. if you want to compute the inverse the inverse is the matrix which is actually defined with respect to minus this factor okay the structure is the same what you have to do is just to change the sign of this it's not difficult to define this factor you want to just do some standard that's a right multiplication between the block matrices and you can to compute the inverse of gamma you you can take the matrix gamma and just to change the sign of all... Remember that gamma is this matrix, it's minus i, minus i, where here you have this Q symmetric matrix, which is defined over the vector with respect to which the gamma matrix depends. Why I tell you this? Because if you want to compute the image, you have to compute exactly the product between the interaction matrix and this matrix which is the one I've talked about here you do the calculation, you get this expression, just keep in mind that these components are exactly the components of this this is OCOO vector HOOXOO1OOZ the kind of reference frame so these are the components of the vector OCOO C is the zone by the corner of the vector ok? 


before doing the break let's conclude this set of slides just by an additional discussion. So if instead of having one point, you have n points, the feature vector in this case is the collection of the normalized coordinates of each point, okay? So you cast all the normalized coordinates pair by pair of all the n points. If you want to compute the interaction metrics in this case, You have a block matrix, where here you have an interaction matrix for the first point, then the interaction matrix for the second point, up to handling the interaction matrix for the last point. So if you have n points, which is the dimension of s here, it's twice n. The dimension of this matrix would be twice n by 6. But here you are stacking one below the other matrices having all two rows. So by the end, the overall matrix here will have twice by n rows. another interesting case that we just discussed we don't do calculations, is the case where you want to compute the direction matrix for an aligned segment So actually your feature is given by a segment on the object. How can we characterize the segment? What we can do is to keep track of the middle point of the segment. The total length of the segment, so x bar, y bar, are the coordinates of the middle point of the segment, are the normalized coordinates of these points. Here you have the total length. And here you have alpha, which is the slope. Of course, we need to define this quantity. So suppose... we know that we have a segment, we have the 2 extremes we can measure also the normalized coordinates of the 2 extremes you have 0.1 and 0.2 are the 2 extremes so you have the coordinates x1 and y1 which are the normalized coordinates for one extreme x2 and y2 are the normalized coordinates for the other extreme so x bar will be the average of the x coordinate Y bar would be the average of the Y coordinates. The total length you use is just the Pythagorean theorem. Delta X is X1 minus X2. Delta Y is Y1 minus Y2. Pythagorean theorem. You have the length of the segment. And we know that the slope is just the arc tangent of delta Y over delta X. okay? But you know this is the most important here is a feature vector with four elements which depends actually on the features of point one and point two. So in this case when we were to compute S bar we use the chain theorem where we compute first S with respect to S1 and to drive by S1 naught the partial derivative of S with respect to S2 multiplied by the S2 dot here what you do is to perform a bit of calculations but we know what is S1 dot is the interaction matrix for point 1 S2 dot here what I have is the interaction matrix for point 2 so what I have to do is just to compute the S with respect to S1 and the S with respect to S2 And here you have a pecathecule which means, to compute partial derivatives of these components with respect to x1 and y1. is the reason why you have this 4-1-2 matrix of the partial derivative of X with respect to S1 and the partial derivative of S with respect to X. This was just to show you that we can compute this interaction matrix for more interesting examples. Okay? But by the end, the knowledge which is required is the normalized coordinates of some points and the some knowledge related to the three-dimensional construction of the scene that in this case is inside the third coordinate of the two points with respect to the parameter. Let's end the break and meet here at 25 of this group. Thank you. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. They're not just the reality. The Can I try it? Yeah. I'll try... Can I put myself in the mirror? Sure! If you want to be close to him... No, no, no, no, look... Perfect, looks better on him... I okay so here there is a long discussion about the partition raising what we are going to do is just review this introduction what I want to stress is just the solution in this last part of the lecture So, the image base means that, as we have already discussed, I take just information from the camera. I don't use this information in principle to reconstruct the three-dimensional scene. This is more or less false, but we will discuss that at the end. For the control purpose, I'm not using the three-dimensional reconstruction, but I need some information coming from there. But at the end, we will discuss this. What are the advantages of having pizza? If you have just information coming from the camera you observe basically what you see in your image So suppose that you are keeping track of the feature vector, of course the camera has a given fit of it. Suppose that you don't control the situation in the image plane, but you use the standard controller working directly in the operational space. He might happen that running your algorithm the object that we have stuck in our scene is the object where we have the points from which you get the feature factor, exit the field of your vector. because since you are running your controller looking just the position of the end-effector it might happen that you reach this configuration instead if you keep track of the feature vector here and you design a controller based on this information you can design a controller that keeps the feature back inside the image frame, which means to keep the object inside the field of view of the camera. This is one of the first main advantage, OK? There are other drawbacks. The drawback is that if you look at just this, you are not looking at a particular configuration of the robot, OK? And so it might happen that actually the robot have very similarities that we know is not something that we like a lot, but we would like to avoid a singular configuration. This is just to give you one main advantage and one main disadvantage. Of course what I'm doing today is a bit ethereal in the sense that in practice there are hybrid schemes implemented which means that you mix the knowledge that you can add in the the operational space from measuring quantities of the joints of the information coming from Canada, ok. You don't keep separated information. But what I want to stress with you is that it is possible to do something interesting just using information from Canada. Then it is obvious that if you mix different information what you can use something that for sure is better than just using one set of information, ok. so I invite you to give a look to the first part of this setup slide by yourself if you have some comments that we can discuss together because they are really available in my opinion let's just discuss the technical solution what is the scenario that we are considering so we consider just the point to point control so you have your robot in an initial configuration want to try the end effector to some final configuration. Okay. We have just to consider this. The existence of the design position for the end effector implies also this existence of the design position of the camera. So suppose that this is the design final point of the end effector. okay? This means that since the camera is attached to them the factor there is also a desired final position for the camera Since you have your object in the environment this means that there exists also a desired feature vector is the feature vector that you have when the camera is in the desired final pose okay so we can introduce this SD vector which is a feature vector that I have which corresponds to the normalized coordinates of the set of points that I have in the object which compose my feature vector when the camera is in the desired final configuration this is what is at the end here and since we want to just reach this final point this corresponds to the case where I basically want to track a constant trajectory so it means that this sd, the desired feature vector is something which is constant it's where I want to drive my feature vector s OK, this is the science of what we want to do. How to get SD? Before running the algorithm what you do is manually bring the robot in the desired final configuration you can measure SD. So you have a priori this knowledge. Notice that we can determine in a unique way, we assume that it is determined in a unique way, because as soon as I have this condition satisfied that we have already discussed, as soon as I have at least four points, where not little points are collinear we know that the relative pose between object frame and camera frame is uniquely determined so, in some senses, this provides us also the knowledge about the feature vector x and so on just one more element in the previous set of slides we have introduced interaction metrics interaction metrics which depends on the feature vector X and remember on the third coordinate of each point so inside ZC This is the case where, let's put ourselves directly on this set-up. Where we have four points which are coplanar, where not little points are collinear. Under this condition, we know that running the PNP strategy that we have seen, can uniquely determine the relative pose between object and camera. which means to reconstruct the matrix TBC From this knowledge what I can get is the third coordinate of the points which provides me the feature vector Let's see if I have the image, here we have not Let me go back to the previous set of slides So, the situation is this. I have ten points here like this. Okay? Suppose that you have four points like this. Or more than six, so we don't have constraints on the actual of the points. Let's consider that this is where we have four points for planar, where all the points are for linear, okay? running the solution we have seen during the last lecture what you can get is the relative pose between the object frame and the camera frame but you can exploit this knowledge together with the fact that you know in advance this coordinates to get also the third coordinate of all the four points with respect to the camera frame which means to have the coordinates of the coordinates Zc for the first point which is Zc1 Zc2 which is the second coordinate, the Z coordinate for the second point, Zc3 and Zc4 ok so the scenario we are considering is this one where we have 4 points ok where for each point you assume to have the knowledge of the third coordinate, the third coordinate with respect to the camera frame that we know we can reconstruct analytically So this is the situation we are considering So what I want to tell you is that basically we have the knowledge of these interaction matrix then in the case of 4 points this interaction matrix is an 8 by 6 matrix because you have for each point the corresponding interaction matrix is 2 by 6 you cast the 4 interaction matrix for the 4 points you have by the end 8 by 6 matrix ok ok so you have your SD point in the image plane you are running your algorithm you have your of course this is I can visualize just the case if you have one point of course trying to abstract the situation here you will have four points because you have a point for each of the points of the object of course Let me just put one point for simplicity. Running the algorithm, what you have is the position of your feature vector. What you want to do is to drive S exactly over SD. So you want to drive to 0. This image space error, which is the difference between SD, which is the desired feature vector, minus the current feature vector. This is what you want to do. 


Ok, so basically what we want to design now is a PD controller with a gravity compensation which is defined directly in the image space area. Do you remember what was the strategy that we used to design the PD controller with the with the quadratic compensation assuming to have the knowledge of the joint variable we took what? A Diagonal Approach and the Diagonal function was the sum of two contributions the kinetic energy plus a quadratic term depending on the joint term right let's mimic this solution ok so let's define the function which is the sum again of the kinetic energy plus a quadratic term that in this case cannot depend on the joint error because I am assuming that I don't have this knowledge but what I do is to put a quadratic term which depends on what on the image space R is a quadratic function of this ESR so KPS here is a matrix which is definitely positive so if you evaluate any quadratic evaluation of the vector e transpose KPS it is competitive it's always greater than 0 as soon as E is different from zero is equal to zero if E is equal to zero Do we like this matrix? This diagonal function? Sorry, yes because it is equal to zero if only if both the error in the image space is equal to zero which means that actually I have reached the desired feature vector and also Q naught must be equal to zero which means is that the minimizer is exactly the point that I want to reach it's the point where the arrow in the image plane is equal to zero and I reach this point with the velocity which is equal to zero which means that once I arrive there I stay there is that ok? so the definition is good what do we have to do next step? is always the same story let's take the time derivative let's substitute bq q dot dot with a model let's exploit that property that we have seen that b dot minus twice c when you evaluate q dot transpose this matrix q dot is equal to 0 let's do always the same steps and see what we get ok join the space model plus this property do the calculations so take the time derivative this is an exercise for you complete the calculations it's a sanity check to see if what we have seen so far is clear or not take the time derivative use the property from the model the property from the model means to write BQ Q dot dot equal U minus CQ dot minus FQ dot minus GQ why do we do that? because this allows me to add into the expression of B dot the presence of the control input ok explore then this property to eliminate a piece of the calculations please do that if you are not able to get this expression look at this pressure, now actually the situation we mimic the same steps we saw when we worked in the joint space but the situation is a bit more critical because at that time we if you were lucky because we had an expression, if you dot transpose with something here, you didn't have an additional variable. And then it was an easy game because we put u equal to what we have within the parenthesis in order to have this value equal to zero, it has to be left with this. Here the problem is that you have an addition element which actually is not strange to have the cos here, there is an error which is not defined in the joint space but it's defined in the image plane space so the natural of this error is different with respect to the first part, so it's not strange to add an additional term, but let's do something also here we can do something, ok and let's start to this since Since the desired feature vector that I want to reach is constant, it's time derivative is equal to zero. Just a comment. Notice that here I have the prices of the time derivative of x. I want to live on this line. In particular, what I want to do is to build a relation between sc dot and q dot. Let's do some manipulations. OK. OK, since SD dot is constant, ES is SD minus S. And if you take the time derivative, you have ES dot equal to minus S dot. Is that clear? OK. Today we discuss a lot about this relation, right? The object, in our case, we are assuming that the object is not moving. so we have that S dot is equal to the interaction matrix L S that we know how to compute it multiplied by B C C is that ok? so I can write actually that minus S dot is equal to minus L S B C C do you agree? it is just what we have already seen OK, be careful. This is the absolute velocity of the camera, right? We have the positional part and the angular velocity in the echo. Long time ago we have seen this relation for the end effector. Forget what I have written down. This was one of the most interesting relation we have had in this class. velocity of the end effector in terms of linear velocity and angular velocity vector of the end effector is equal to the geometric Jacobian multiplied by Q dot. But since the camera is solid with the end effector the velocity of the end effector and the velocity of the camera will be exactly the same. So what I can do here is I can write the same elevation for the camera and just looking to the velocity. Even though there is an offset between the Origen of the camera frame, a little bit of frame. When you look at the velocity, they are exactly the same because they are shorter than one with the other. So I can write the desegregation that we see. What we take together good. Because I can write let's just do this is another one more calculation but I will close there because what I have here is not the expression of the camera velocity with respect to the camera frame not wrong, what we have to do is just to pre-multiply these two terms by RC transpose and I can write in a convenient way that this product is this two by two block matrix and multiplied by this, which is exactly the velocity BC in place of the velocity BC and I can write this is a relation G Q Q dot. Is that clear? Perfect. So let's replace BCC exactly with this expression. Okay, so we have this. We have that BCC is this, are you here? Look at the first row, which we have just discussed. OK, I can replace this CC with this expression. You can write that minus s dot is equal to ls multiplying this matrix, multiplying jq and I denote this matrix by Jm, OK? to compute the notation, multiplied by Q dot. Okay. So just to summarize what we derived from was this relation, E has dot equal to minus J error Q dot. Did you follow so far? Why I like this, let's go back because doing all the standard regulations we are right here right? And I told you there is this term, it's a bit annoying I would like to have that V dot is equal to minus Q dot transpose F Q dot plus Q dot transpose my final indices U minus 70. Why that? Because if I have an expression like this, I can put U equal to what you have here, so this term is equal to zero, and I have that V dot, as soon as Q dot is different from zero, is negative. Okay. Now it's nice to find that the dot is a functional dot because this allows me to write this entire expression exactly in this way. Okay. This is what exactly we can do now because this is the expression. is that it says he has got me, is there any show? Okay. You do that. Okay. What do you get these five it is a special. Okay. So how does I need you know, you me when to you. My yes. Yes. this term is equal to if you follow all the steps so, we reach this expression reasoning together we found a relation between E-s dot and q dot and by the end we get this we are almost there actually In graphics what we do is to add additional terms if you replace here this sign should be minus. Check please by tomorrow if it is class of minus but my opinion is minus. To read the calculation again. OK indeed here we have the sign plus. Which is consistent with the fact that in the previous slide the sign must be minus. Typically what we do is add also this term. Do you remember that when we derive the PDE with the graphic compensation controller, we add also the derivative part just to speed up the transient. This derm here is here for the same reason. Okay? Indeed, if you add also this derm, you can verify by the end that this is the dot. Notice that it is even more negative. Okay? So, you are speeding up the transient. Okay? Okay. Follow this strategy. We reach a point where q-dot, by the end, is equal to 0 which means that we reach a final configuration, right? because we reach a point where q dot is equal to 0 which means that we reach a point and we stay there there is a question did we reach the desired point? this is the main question of course that I need to address what do we need to do now? to take out our control law To go back to my dynamics, let's suppose that I reach the equilibrium point, because this relation is telling me that I reach an equilibrium point. And let's see what is the possible equilibrium point that I might have reached. Is that okay? Are the same steps that you should already start. Okay? So here there are just some implementation discussions but let's go before looking at that that we conclude the theoretical part. Ok so from this relation we have that the reactor function decreases until you reach q dot and when q dot is different from 0 that means that you reach a point where q dot is equal to 0 which means that you reach an equilibrium point what is this equilibrium point? is there a way to characterize it? is the equilibrium point hopefully coinciding with the design? final configuration what we do is to do what we already done at that time let's take my dynamical model let's substitute u with the control law that I have just designed keep in mind that in the equilibrium point Q dot is equal to 0 Q dot dot is also equal to 0 so I have a lot of simplifications all these terms are equal to 0 because I am not in the diagram I can cancel the gravity term ok and by the end I am left with this relation So... Yes or no? This is the question. Yes or no? Yes. Under which condition? because it's zero it's wonderful but it depends on the on the rank of J right because if the candle of J n transpose is not just equal to the new vector but inside the candle of J n transpose I have some vectors and accidentally this vector kTXES is exactly inside the kernel of this it might happen that I have reached a point where the feature error is different from 0 but this expression is equal to 0 ok okay so lets try just to conclude our reason so remember the expression of gl, gl is equal to this things okay what is the main point? the main point is that if the Chateaubriand is full rank this matrix is full rank also Jn is full rank and under this assumption I'm sure that if this quantity is equal to zero it must be true also that the s is equal to zero but of course there is a if this is true if this is true I'm putting some conditions I should be able to be sure that they are satisfied. Is that okay? Okay. Before saying hi to each other, let's make some final considerations. First consideration. Let's try to understand how we can implement this thought. We are engineers. that you want to have to fix. Working in practice every day. So the first nice new is that these strategies work in practice. There are people implementing it, with success. But what is the knowledge that they must have in order to implement it? Let's look at the control. The control is this. First of all, let's appreciate that the only knowledge that you need about the model is the gravity term I don't need a full knowledge of the model Here I need this JL matrix which is the product of what? JL is the product of the interaction matrix This matrix accounts for the relative orientation between the camera frame and the base frame and the Jacobian. The Jacobian we know how to compute it but you can understand that for the interaction matrix also to compute these relative orientations of the camera frame and base frame. So this is a knowledge that I can get, reconstructing the 3-dimensional scene. OK? Here I need the knowledge of this ZC vector where I add the ZC coordinates of all the endpoints that I've been considering to build the future graph. So it should run in principle, in parallel, this three dimensional reconstruction algorithm. We saw one possible analytical solution, but let me stress that there are also numerical solutions that you can run, and maybe in the notes that I'm going to upload there is also to one possible numerical solution, just if you want, for your knowledge to read it. I need also direct force between the camera frame and the laser frame and then I can run this algorithm. Is that okay? Let's say that by the end the solution that I get is not as smooth as the one that we found walking directly in the joint space. But this is a trade off, trade off. So in that case, basically I assume a lot of knowledge and knowledge which actually we assume to be able to measure what the error at the joint level which actually was an error characterizing the entire configuration of the robot. Here the information I'm using is the projection of what's going to happen in the robot world into a two dimensional image so we need to accept that the solution is not so clear as in the previous case clear means that I have to accept some compromise I reach the desired configuration provided that GQ is full rank, provided that LS is full rank on, how to verify this, you have to pay attention, so on. But this is a trade off about the kind of information that we have. In practice, you are not implementing APU, visual ceremony, unless you are in some specific scenarios where it is convenient just to implement it. But in practice, you mix the information. So you have an even better solution. Because mixing the two solutions, you are having the benefits coming from the fact that if you work considering the entire knowledge about the configuration of the robot measuring the errors, you can reach exactly the design configuration. Here you have the fact that you can keep the feature vector inside the field of view, which is important, of course. In order to keep under your eyes, under the eyes of the robot, the entire situation. Of course we don't have the time to see an hybrid solution, because I want to go toward the last topic, which is the interaction of the robot with the environment, ok? But I hope you have appreciated that just using a projection of what's going on in the 3-dimensional world to explain any way, thanks to the algorithm, we can do something which is extremely interesting. Just a comment, in several applications, sometimes, what you have is that the robot, this is more related to the Scala robot, the Scala robot is a robot which actually has an arm, which moves up over a plane and then you have the final factor that can go up and down to rotate, But typically the fact that you have this entire arm whose last point can move in the same plane brings us to the fact that actually, if we describe this point, this coordinates are constant. So there are some situations where you can assume that you have enough priori knowledge about the Z-C coordinates that can make our life easier. you don't have to reconstruct all that. Or we can assume we have some estimates that you keep there. Of course, you have some approximation about the interaction matrix that there are some beautiful mathematical tools that allows you to deal with these approximated interaction matrix. Just the last comments. About the implementation of this law, yes just a comment, of course you need to measure the feature vector error. This is water that you can measure. You know the desired feature vector S, you measure the normalized coordinates of the the feature vector s, so you can assume where this knowledge, you know due dot, but there are some cases where people, if there is a way for you to measure s dot, so directly the velocity of the feature vector, you can replace this term, there are cases where people you will implement with this one, instead of having this term which depends on p dot you have a term which actually depends on s dot this is just technical details about possible alternative implementation okay so, tomorrow evening, later in the afternoon actually we need to move toward interaction of the robot with the fragment I need to rewrite the control laws that we have seen so far in terms of the operational space error. Because we have seen beautiful laws, beautiful is just my opinion, written in the way in the joint space. but when I interact with the environment, I have to pay more attention to than the fact or rather than the rest of the configuration on the road because is the faculty, the environment. So what they want to do is to rewrite all the laws that we have seen so far in terms of an era, which is defined the participation space. Bit of math. something that is really doable easy and straightforward something that is more conceptualized and interesting and then we start to analyze the interaction with the environment So, no lecture of first day, no lecture of next Tuesday we have two lectures next week So, now we still have five lectures or two lectures next week, two lectures the other week from now. If you want, we can have some other lectures for exercises that can come here if you want, during the first week of June. Okay, during our lecture time for the ones that come here, we can decide a couple of times, but that is, maybe, a day or two. I don't know if you have maybe already, you will have also all the other classes by the end of may or do you have something else in June? because if you are here, I can come here and we can discuss something which is not clear for you I can give my ability to do this okay, I need to upload a lot of interventions, a lot of PDF material and also past exams and I have to upload also the third homework and also the numerical exercises which are preliminary to the last one Thank you.