GIà TAGLIATA 

Today I will upload the homework. Let's just discuss a couple of elements together. So this is the arm that I'm assigning you. Okay, so we have this one, the joint and the other one. I ask you to derive the model. There is a second point, which is something that we didn't see in the class. So please try to put your hand up so there is a point. So you get the point, one point, if you do one way in the first part. Please, you have to follow the strategy that we are seeing in the class. I would say that one third of the homework of last year we a different pattern. And unfortunately, they plot 0. So please follow the steps that are given to us. This is a scientific check for you to see if you understood everything. Okay? The second point, what I'm asking you is, To design a trajectory at the joint level that allows the robot to go from the configuration to these other configurations, okay? That means sketches. What I asked you is that the eigenvectors perform a straight line go from here to here. And I have the sum of the elements about the time, this is five seconds, starts from velocity equal to 0, it has to reach this point, the velocity equal to 0. So try to have some idea. It is an additional point. Okay. So this is also a part of the let's say that all the of the it's bit strange. So what I ask you in the optional point is trying to design a projectile tracking controller able to track Okay. And I try to implement it supposing that instead of starting from the initial configuration just to be able to believe the initial configuration suppose that for instance a member factor is in this configuration I would like to see if the trajectory controller is able to do something like that to verify if this worker to show me that the controller is working for instance what you can do is to plot the behaviour of the arrows Okay? Here we are interested Just into the position of the vector, okay? You might plot the value of the arrow in the x, y coordinate for instance, depends on how you put the frame, okay? Or you can plot the arrows of the joint vectors, okay? This is another, another option. So what you can do is a 2 per 2 may be the initial configuration of the joint I just changed one value of the job but what you can do is to change the initial value of the job itself. Just a comment. If you want to simulate the behavior of your controller, you don't have to implement an AI model. Because the trajectory tracking controller that OBM developed is a frequent linearization strategy. Right? We know that when we implement the controller, we are neglecting the effect of all the nonlinear part. And by the end, we have seen that the behavior on the joint errors, is a second-order differential equation. Right? So actually what do you have to do if you implement the correct trajectory controller that we have seen in the class to analyze the behavior of your controller is enough to simulate the behavior of this. Okay? So what you have to do is You can solve analytically if you want, okay? You have the initial condition because if you decide hoping is there at the beginning. Okay? And we have seen back here. What you can do is you can have K prime in the diagonal. So actually in fact you split this second order two dimensional differential equation into two scalar differential equation. And then so the differential equation. Okay. If you have some problems in understanding all these, I'm available the half of May to provide you suggestions about all these parts. Okay? What about the deadline? Also the third homework is coming, is another modeling exercise that asking something else about the adaptive controller. Okay? So let's do the end of May for both the homework. Then there is the fourth homework, that I will assign some numerical stuff to be done during this month, but we can have the deadline for the last homework after June. Is that okay? Now is the proper moment to say something about the deadline, okay? If you don't like the deadline, and here now is the moment to say something it's like doing the wedding if you want to say something there is just a left moment otherwise yes one more question about the points yes complimentary let's do one point for the modeling part which is the most important is the one that you should be able to do that please follow the that we have seen in the class. I'm pretty sure, and I will send you an email in June telling you that one third of the students took a different path. I'm pretty sure that this is going to the lily pin. It's a strange, each year there are students taking different strategies. When I talk about providing a model it means that you have to assign frames. the first important point we have seen a procedure to do that don't put the random axis yes it is working yes but I'm asking you to follow what we have seen in the class okay because it's a way for you to understand the material it's a way to go through the entire class basically so far and to see if what we have seen together is real or not I would say that for sure one third of students in the last year put in the wrong way the answers. It seems strange? Yes! It's also true that here, I don't know, you are maybe 40-50 and they receive 120 solutions for the first homework, so there are a lot of students that do not come in here. missing this important information. So I'm pretty sure that the one-third is inside the set of the students. Okay. I'm pretty sure about that. Try to understand how to design a trajectory. One suggestion will be to design the trajectory at that effect of level and we know how to translate it into a trajectory of the joint lever ok? Look if you want to perform this trajectory it means that the robot has to move but while this is turning rotating means that this has to go back and then again after try to figure out in your mind the movement, ok? Try to design this, well, okay. Maybe I didn't answer completely your question, it's a half point for designing the trajectory and one additional half point for the optional path. Where I stress one more time, you don't have to do the method, the dynamics, because I'm asking you to show me that it is converging. And what you have to do is just to plot errors for instance on the joint level. That's okay. So it means just to solve this differential equation. Actually you cannot find it changing the gains to see if you are improving the performance stuff like that. Okay? Any other questions? then if the homework is done in a really good way there are some random half points that I assign according to the area where we are written okay? If they are sufficiently far away from the solution, even by just GPT, stuff like that. Okay? Any question? is the end of May a good deadline? Okay. Then there are other job, okay? So at least you can organize it yourself. Okay? If there are no questions, let's start with the theoretical part of the class. 


We are approaching the end of the class. So the problem is in you, since we arrived at the end during the last lecture about adaptive control, to the view of this that is the way to try to help you start to your own mind the main steps. Okay? Okay. So, I did a long introduction during the last lecture concerning the several kinds of controllers we have seen in this class. Ok? So there is a natural way to design controllers which is typically adopted as I will say almost first-time-back from the control system engineering engineers. Which is to design the controller as the sum of two conclusions that feed forward and feed back. Okay? And actually if you remember, I started exactly from this idea to design a trajectory truncated controlled algorithm. Okay? Then since mathematically speaking, what you can prove about this controller is just the local convergence properties. I show you that they are employing more sophisticated strategy, which employ the use of feedback linearization, we can help obtain global convergence. Okay? Then I told you actually, let's go back to the initial, feedforward plus feedback strategy. that's the user hybrid idea in the field for work, path. Okay? And let's start concerning the adaptive controller topic from this controller. Well, you can see that in the first part we are neglecting the presence of feature just for simplicity here. Okay, there is the feature, sorry. Let's look at the first four terms. Yeah, well exactly. The model would be a perfect fit forward if all the elements are evaluated in the desired trajectory. Instead notice that some elements are evaluated in the actual trajectory, some other ones in the desired trajectory. In particular, the ones entering linearly the model are evaluated is the actual trajectory and I told you through some sophisticated math that we do not have the time to see together here you can prove that this strategy is converging globally to the desired trajectory since in the adaptive control scenario we would like to understand what's going on when we are just in approximate knowledge of the moment Okay. Which means that we don't have precise knowledge of c, g and so on. Is the reason why typically we have a bit too hot, okay. People have seen that this strategy is working well typically concerning tracking the desired velocity. But there are situations where there is an offset with respect the desired position, okay. So you track perfectly the velocity, but you don't track perfectly the position, which means that there is an offset in there. To get rid of this, I remember the example of the two masses. What we did there was to change a bit the desired trajectory and we use a different reference trajectory, which was what? The sum between the desired velocity plus a term which is proportional to the position error. So this means that if you have a bias in the error, okay? What you do is you increase the desired velocity in such a way to reduce this position error. But notice that as soon as this position error is going to zero, the reference velocity is becoming the desired velocity as we would like to have. Lambda is a proportional gain to be able to design it. We have seen that it depends on Kp and Kd is a suitable choice that we impose to be that in order to have the desired properties in the Lyapunov and Rimsky-Korsakov. Okay. So what I told you, let's change actually the controller we consider today. Let's substitute the qv dot dot with a qr dot dot which is the time derivative of these. Let's substitute the qv dot with a qr dot is that okay? Actually what is interesting is that it turns out that proving in the ideal condition, so whether we have precise knowledge of the model proving the convergence of this strategy is easier from a mathematical point of view than proving the convergence of this law which is a bit more natural. Okay. And that is what we have done together. So as a first step, I tell you, let's prove the convergence of this strategy I want to show you that in any case, this strategy where we use instead of the desired velocity a different notion of reference velocity is still converging to zero tracking error in a global way. Global means no matter which condition, Okay? And we did a bit of job, right? We did a bit of job, we impose lambda to be equal to this KT inverse and KT sigma, we use sigma which is this quantity we define sigma to be equal to this and we see that sigma can be defined alternatively also as the difference between the reference velocity and the actual velocity. Okay? We did some manipulation and by the end, if you take the dynamics of so you implement this controller, okay? You substitute you with this quantity. By the end, we saw that the dynamics of our system is described by this differential equation which speaks in terms of C. Okay, what we want to do here, what we want to do here is to show analyzing is differential equation that qt, the qt, the dot is going to 0. What is the approaching that we like a lot of function? How is the function defined as the sign of term which is related to kinetic energy plus a term which is quadratic with respect to the position. Okay? and is symmetric positive matrix. Here we are in the degree of freedom in deciding how to design it. And we saw that designing Hermes equal to twice lambda kd. All the matrix is here are diagonal with all the elements in the diagonal strictly positive when the matrix is diagonal with all the elements in the diagonal. greater than 0 is for sure that's positive. Okay? Is for sure that's positive. So here we take the time derivative, we take the time derivative, we explore this relation which comes from the dynamics, okay? You can take Bq sigma dot equal to all the elements on the other side. we explore a symmetric property on the matrix. Please do the calculations. Do the calculations to get from here to here, Is it good sign here, is it a sign? If from here, exploring those properties you don't reach this up here, we see the together, just five minutes and we see why this is good. but please do that ok? do you like this expression? wonderful no? what's better than this? look I will give you an example and in particular we know that we converge toward all the points where V dot is equal to 0. When this is equal to 0? When Q tilde is equal to 0? When Q tilde dot is equal to 0, which implies that also sigma is equal to 0. So the only equilibrium point toward which we converge for the students taking the non-linear control class applied directly to the last side theorem, here we are converging exactly to the points where Q tilde, Q tilde dot. is equal to 0 which is exactly what we want. Is that okay? This is the easy part. Okay? This is the easy part because we are still in the case where we have perfect knowledge of the moment. We want to remove this assumption, we would like to have an assumption working also when we have just an approximate knowledge of the moment. Is that OK? So what do we have to prove? Is that this alternative control is still converging to zero error tracking in a global domain. in a global domain no matter the initial condition here we are tracking the desired trajectory Okay, what is the most interesting part now is to make this law working also in the scenario where we don't have the precise knowledge of the model So now let me assume that actually I have just approximated knowledge of B, C, F, G why you see the symbol heart over these letters, which means it's just a nominal knowledge initial knowledge that I have which is approximated it's not the true knowledge for instance I don't have the precise knowledge of some inertia term, some mass the balance was not working well so I have just some errors here and there Okay? Remember that we spent one entire lecture not for the final example but we could see that We can rewrite our dynamical model as the product between R and XOR multiplied by the pi vector. The pi vector is the vector containing the dynamical parameters as we discussed it. What do we have inside the pi components? we have a combination of elements of the inertia tensor of the mass of the position of the body centers weighted by the mass and so on. Okay. And actually it is more convenient instead of describing the model in this way, to describe it in this way. I told you these are equivalent. When I say I have the model of my robot, I can think of either the description of b, you see gf or to have the knowledge of the regressor and the pi vector each of it has its own structure. Okay? So in this case, since I have approximate knowledge about the dynamical elements of my system, what I have is just an approximate knowledge of the pi vector. Then why regressor not this? That actually depends on q, q dot, q r dot dot dot. So basically what do you want to do inside the regressor is to substitute the q dot dot with the q r dot dot. What about q dot? Here you have to pay attention. There are some q dots which stay q dots, there are some q dots which becomes q r dot. It's your job to understand which ones are substituted that this will be one question of the third order of work in a particular dynamical system, okay? Okay, so now the control that I'm implementing is this Question for you, suppose that you don't change pi, pi hat is a constant over the trajectory. Do we expect that this approximated version of the previous controller is converging towards zero error tracking? No. What I expect is that I am just entering inside the tube of the desired trajectory, okay? The bigger the distance between the pi hat and the true pi, the bigger the tube, the smaller the distance, which means that the more close is pi hat to pi, the smaller this tube is quite I need, right? Okay, so let's see if I have a way to change pie-hat over the trajectory in order to improve the pie-hat in such a way that the trajectory pattern error is converging. Is that okay? Okay, in order to have a rule for the pie-hat, what we do is to introduce the optimal function to take the time derivative and to see from the time derivative in the spectrum there is a brilliant idea that comes directly from the equations that tells me how to update pi dot. That again, this was the part that we followed. Okay, so let's substitute this expression here. We need some calculations that I'm not going to repeat here of course, but the note is that by substituting after some algebraic manipulations that are in the set of slides that we saw together during the last lecture. By the end we reach this differential equation. In the previous case, in the earlier case, What we are here was the left-hand side equal to 0. The fact that here I am just an approximate knowledge of my system, leave me a differential equation where the right-hand side is in principle different from 0. OK. And the notice, notice the right-hand side Is minus the regressor multiplied by pi tilde What is pi tilde? pi tilde is exactly the error of that I have inside the dynamical parameters Because it is the difference between the approximate knowledge that I have minus the true value If I have the perfect knowledge of the model pi hat is equal to pi So pi tilde is zero and we are inside the previous case data case okay so, do you expect that the previous Lyapunov function is the right Lyapunov function to analyze the system where I am in this additional element? no, maybe you can try it to see designing a Lyapunov function is based a lot on the experience, the personal experience trial and error procedure sometimes based on Some of the problems that you have based on your experience. Okay? So what we did was to take the previous function and to add an additional term, which again is a quadratic term based on an error that we have. In this case, the error is the modeling error because it is a quadratic term based on pi tilde which is the modeling error that I have. Okay, let's take the time derivative here and let's see what's going to happen and do it in sub-calculation again. Again, please take the time derivative of p. Destroyed all the same properties that we have already seen. Do these exercises, a good exercise. and very fine and what you get is exactly this expression. So it's the same story. There are a couple of ideas basically on the basis of all the control of the circle. But do these calculations if you are able to do that. Okay. Do you like the first three terms? a character effect, right? Here, notice that I have Phi tilde dot, which means that here, Phi tilde dot is telling me how to update the Pi hat vector. It's a rule that tells me in continuous time how to update. Okay, let's design Phi tilde dot, the updating rule for Pi half such a way that this term is equal to 0. So if this is equal to 0, the remaining part is strictly negative. And it is exactly convergent towards what? Q tilde equal to 0, Q tilde dot equal to 0. Okay? So this is the way we can design the control. just a comment, we know, we know that to go from here to here, when I take the time derivative to the other. There is a point where I have to substitute the Q, dQ, sigma dot with this expression that I got it, I get it from the model. Notice that here, we have also the presence of this additional term in this case, okay? Which is the one that provides me this. Okay. Since pi tilde is equal to pi hat minus pi, pi tilde dot is exactly pi hat dot. So from here I can get the rule for pi tilde dot, which provides me exactly the rule for pi hat dot. Okay? And yes, I'm sorry, here it is. And how to update the Pajaro. Is that okay? What is the point? What is the point? So I know that q tilde, q tilde dot is going to 0, which means that also sigma is going to 0. Which means that the pi hat dot is converging to 0. The fact that the pi hat dot is converging to 0 means that the pi hat is converging to a constant value. Okay is not diverging, is not oscillating is converging to a value, is this value coinciding with the true value of Pi is not always true. Typically we keep improving there are situations we saw the example of the time to go back to the example we discussed during the last lecture we saw that is not always the case. And the fact is that by the end you converge to move on to a vector Pi hat which has this property. Might happen that actually the kernel of y has some element, I have not seen the Ingenuity, Pi hat minus Pi is exactly inside the kernel of y. Okay? But important, so I stress since the beginning, My primary goal is to drive the error to 0. If you want to have also a Pi hat conversion to Pi, we need a more sophisticated strategy. Okay? In order to have also the secondary coherence. But this is out of the scope of this class, but just please keep in mind of this control law. Okay. Okay. So overall our scheme is the following one. This is the controller u, where pi hat comes from this updating, okay? So the controller is based on by the combination of these two equations. Okay? So you start from the initial value of pi hat, here you have the continuous time updating law, integrating these and the knowledge of the initial condition of pi hat, you keep track of the entire vector pi hat, pi hat along the entire trajectory. This is the simple, particularly simple, but let's try just to discuss a bit together. Okay? Here again, they do that we implemented. When you implement your input to the manipulator, we have the position and velocity that we mentioned. Okay? They are used inside several blocks. Yeah. We need to build. These are the design. Okay? So let's see first of all, how to build sigma. Here you have td minus q, you have qt multiplied by lambda, here we have qv dot, they are summed together. We get qr dot, qr dot minus q dot provides the exact sigma. Here I need to build the QR dot, because notice that inside the regressor I need the knowledge of QQ dot. So you add QQ dot from here and exactly the block here in order to build the transpose of the regressor you need a QR dot which I have built here, is here so you bring here. But we need also qr dot dot in order to be a qr dot dot what we need to do, here we have a qd dot minus qd we have q tilde dot multiplied by lambda sum to qd dot dot you have qr dot dot which enters here and so you have the log of the Lagrangian Sigma and the elements that we have here so we have the pi dot we integrate it we have pi hat which has the regression of the regression which means that again Q dot, Q dot, Q dot dot is the first term in order to build the second term here we have Kd multiplied by sigma you did the dot plus the Lambda to the field is sigma. Sigma divided by two, three, something here, you add here. Okay, okay, let's stop here for ten minutes Then we go back to the example that we discussed during the last lecture. Okay. and then I reviewed the code it was really absurd it was really absurd I wrote I checked it we should see it is written test extensively and approve it on all machines the code says it is a work the color says it is a work ... It's a bit like Zoom, maybe you don't read a lot I write what I want to write then I log into the system then I delete what I like I wrote everything in Italian, I didn't know how to write in English. I don't write in English very often. I don't know how to write stuff, but I write it like a script. and he's not allowed to leave the room I'm going to go to my own room I'm going to my own room uuuuh I'm going to my own room so, this is? 8262 so, this is? 56409 5649 2. I didn't see it. No, I'm sorry. It looked like the 16 seconds one. 3, 9, 5, 8, 2, 8, 2, 8. 2, 9, 5, 8, 2, 8. 2, 9, 5, 8, 2, 8. 2, 9, 5, 8, 2, 8. A little bit too much. 1, 2, 9, 5, 8. 2, 9, 5, 8. We've got it written down. Okay. 2, 9, 5, 8. Yes. And as I would say, the comfort. Why the comfort? Why the comfort? The comfort. I'm going to have to buy a new one. I'm going to have to buy a new one. I'm going to have to buy a new one. I'm going to have to buy a new one. I'm going to have to buy a new one. I'm going to have to buy a new one. I'm going to have to buy a new one. I'm going to have to buy a new one. I'm going to have to buy a new one. If you're going to buy a new one, you're going to have to buy a new one. I'm going to have to buy a new one. If you're going to buy a new one, you're going to have to buy a new one.


 Okay, let's get started. Let's apply one of your simple mistakes of the simple link. Okay? So this is the dynamical model of this structure, Okay? So we have the inertia Theta dot dot, theta is the angle which measures the angular displacement between the pendulum and the pendulum. Okay? I, capital I, is the inertia. The inertia is seen from this point. So this is the inertia of the link with respect to the baryspectrum, to which we need to add, according to the parallel axis, the mass of the mass, d squared, where d is the distance between the baryspectrum and the axis around which the pendulum rotates. loss we know how here there is also the presence of which is a coefficient of the velocity that is the angular velocity equal to you which is the total of life. is that okay? We need linear parametrization is an important ingredient in the adaptive model. The linear parametrization is y multiplied by phi, put this y just by of the model, we know that y depends on Theta dot dot Theta dot Theta. We can see, we can properly rewrite the model that we have here as the product between these rho vector, Theta dot dot the sine of Theta, Theta dot multiply the inertia. Inertia multiplies up to Theta dot dot, Mgd which multiplies exactly the sine of Theta fb which multiplies Theta. So it's quite straightforward here to get the expression of the regression of y. Is that okay? Perfect. Equal to u. So, what is the controller that I implemented in this case where I assume to have just an approximate knowledge of the dynamic parameter. So I have just an approximate knowledge of I, of mgd, of fv, okay? So what I need to do is to implement this law, okay? While I have the regression, that in this case is function of theta, theta dot, theta dot, theta dot. first of all, what is Theta dot? Theta dot according to what we have seen is Theta desire dot plus Lambda multiply the error which is the difference between Theta dot desire minus Theta. Lambda is Kd inverse Kp here Kd and Kp are scalar, which means to take the ratio between Kp and Kd. Is that okay? So this is the expression for tta, is that ok? So the controller that I'm implementing is the regressor Phi hat, the regressor in place of tta dot dot, I have to put tta dot dot, okay? The sine of Theta stays the sine of Theta, ok? Because where I have Q, it stays Q and I don't have to replace it with some hypothetical Q, because I don't have Q1. Here, this Theta dot must be substituted by Theta dot. So in this case, the regression of y Theta, theta dot, theta dot, theta dot dot r becomes theta dot dot the sign of theta, theta dot dot, theta dot dot. Okay? So the first part of the controllers, which is the multiplication between the regress of y and I is exactly the sum of the first three elements that you see here. Okay. well, you can see the presence of act over the dynamical parameters of the system then I have to add the proportional derivative term which is kP there plus QP there that we know can be represented also as k multi-line is just a matter of how you want to write it this is the first component of our updating law because we know that we have also a second component which tells me how to update the knowledge about the parameter. pi dot, which is the time derivative of three elements that we have here. Okay? Is equal to what? To k pi inverse, here k pi inverse is equal to one, sorry, is equal to gamma 1, gamma 2, gamma 3. So that is the UC gamma 1, gamma 2, gamma 3 are the elements of the diagonal of K Pi inverse. Okay? So here you have the product between the matrix, the inverse, which is this 3 by 3-dimensional vector by y Pi. So that's the, Why is a low vector, right? Why transpose easy column vector? So when here you add the k Pi inverse by y transpose. You are computing this product. y transpose of which is eta r dot dot cos of eta eta r dot is that ok? if you do this product you have a 3 dimensional vector where the first component you have gamma 1 eta dot dot to the sine of theta gamma 3 theta dot. Do you agree? Multiply, we have still to put this element. So far we have computed this product, we have this element, here you have Sigma, we know that this is equal to Sigma, Sigma is also equal to QR dot minus Q dot. Okay, it's just a matter of which representation you want to put here, we have exactly tcarr dot Is that okay? So this is the adaptive controller that we implement for this scheme. Any question? Let's consider a concrete case where we have the real dynamic value of this coefficient, coefficient, 7.561 Here we have initial estimate. Let's put the control parameters notice that of course they are all positive they are all positive and what we want to track are two trajectories so two different cases the first one is the case where I want to track a sinusoidal trajectory in position Okay? one is a bang bang trajectory on the design acceleration of the bang bang means is that in this case, you have the profile, this is the amplitude, this is the frequency by which you change. Time factor means that the acceleration is plus one, minus one, plus one, minus one, and the rate by which you alternate from one to minus one is detected by this range. Okay. Okay. Let's consider the first case of the design project that they want to track is minus the single zone respect to time. Okay? So remember when we already discuss the peategnism of the plot. Okay? So here we assume to start from this initial configuration. Theta 0 equal to 0, Theta dot 0 equal to 0. What is the initial error? Initial error if you put 0 here Sine of 0 is 0. So the initial error in position is 0. What is the error in velocity? Let's take the time derivative here, you have minus the cosine of t. Evaluated in 0 is minus 1. Okay? So the error in velocity, since I'm starting from velocity equal to 0 is minus 1. These justify the fact that the blue curve, which is the position error start from 0. But the green curve, where you have the velocity error starts from minus 1. Okay? You hang your ego, ego, here I'm just plotting the behavior of the errors. You can see that both the error position, velocity is going to 0 nothing surprising we prove it mathematically so it's what we were expecting right? because all the gains were positive according to the assumptions and so on look at the right picture here we have the behaviour of the is the behavior of U is not really perfect sinusoidal but we discussed this and that we are surprised in this case that we needed to compensate also for the gravity ok so it's not a precise sinusoidal but almost Let's consider the second case where we add this profile for the acceleration Getting, here again you can notice that both the position and velocity are going to 0, right? This is the behavior of the control unit we apply, of course, keeping changing the acceleration makes the behavior more purpose, okay? as you can see from here but in any case both the position and the velocity are also equal as expected okay what is the interesting part of this example? is concerning the fact whether Pi hat is converging to the true Pi or not why I provided two examples Because in one example is not converging to the true value in the second example yes the first example you can see as I told you since pi hat dot is converging to 0 this allows me to conclude that pi hat is converging to a fix value asymptotically but they are not exactly coinciding with the true value Only, only if B hat is convergent to the two values because notice that the difference is going to 0. Okay? But the other two are not converging. The two values. Okay? In this case, what we have is that pi hat minus pi belongs to the diagonal of y. In the other instance, the fact that one is bigger the other smaller with respect to the two values they are compensating the overall behavior. Okay? But now this is the second trajectory step. Here we have also the exact convergence of all the three three magnetical parameters to the two values. Okay? So when we have a nonlinear non-linear systems is a bit difficult to understand what are the trajectories by which you can hope to identify the true model. Okay? Last lecture, I did this kind of reasoning related to this part. If the design trajectory is persistently exciting the dynamics of the system. In this case, the back-bend acceleration trajectory is exciting the dynamics of my system. In this case we have that those are the art is going to be part of it. But if you take just the same object, you are exciting, just basically a small amount of frequency of the dynamics of the system, okay? It's like the first, the first trajectory, okay? It's just a broad reasoning. These reasoning are, can be made completely formal in the case of your linear systems, okay? The non-linear system is a bit more difficult, but it depends on how rich is the desired trajectory that you want to track. Rich means in terms of the exacting the dynamics of the system, Just a summation of moments, suppose that you have a perfect knowledge of some dynamical parameters. In this case what we can do is to split our linear parameterization as the sum of two contributions. So you split the pi vector into the components where you don't have precise knowledge, and the components where you have perfect knowledge, okay? So you can rewrite y equal to y the part of the regression related to the components that you don't have exact the knowledge plus the part of the regression where you have precise knowledge multiplied by the part where you have precise knowledge. What you can get here is typically faster transient in that converges because you have some already precise knowledge that you don't have to adapt. Okay. This is still very important. Any questions? Okay, let's understand where we are. okay 


Now, it's time to talk a bit about controllers which are driven by information coming from cameras is everyone in this room taking the computer vision class? who is not taking? okay, no problem not a problem in the sense that I will provide a just broad description of the beginning. And naturally, we start from a point assuming that we have already processed the image, we assume to have some knowledge. And I guess I hope that for everyone this mission point will be clear what I mean. Starting from this point, should be, should be self-contained for everyone. Okay? So just tell me if I get it right. Alright. Okay? In the remaining time that we have, let's just make a short introduction between two, sorry, two visual self-learning. What do we mean by visual self-learning? Is the kind of control that we design where the information that we use is coming from images. So far what we did was to assume that we can measure position velocities, of the jonky level, the Cartesian level and so on, ok? Let's remove these strong assumptions, of course. Actually, we have all this information and we need to use it. But it's to consider the absolute situation where we have all the information coming from cameras. And let's see what we are able to do. ok? so as I said today is just an introduction to the topic tomorrow we will try to enter into a bit more details ok control base of feedback of visual measurement is called visual support not all of you I have the knowledge of what are image processing algorithms, no problem. Okay. No problem. But what is the main point? The main point is that when we take a picture, we cannot assume that we can take the entire image store for all the time in our memory because I keep taking images. Suppose that you have a robot moving, suppose that the robot has a camera which is solid and good robot this camera keeps taking pictures that you cannot store all all the frames of course so what we need to do is to analyze the image to extract just some information which is useful for our task and this information is using less time For instance here, what you can build, is just a black and white image, where you have just the information related to the green ball. OK? Then we can add some compact descriptions of the ball, just with the center position, and the radius, for instance. There are algorithms which are pretty good in doing that. Nowadays, these algorithms are used in programming which are trained exactly for what you want to do. Okay. Sure, this is not true, this is written here because we see just a part, we don't have the time to decide. We'll use the amount of work. Let's say there are typically two ways to approach the program. The first one is a position based in and image-based dissociative modeling. Let me discuss the two points. We take images of the scene where the robot is. Have you seen in computer vision how we can reconstruct the three-dimensional world starting from images? Maybe no. Basically, I guess that the computer vision classes more related to image processing feature extraction algorithms right? What is the idea? We have two eyes, right? Why do we have two eyes? In order to have the chance to build the third dimension. When you take an image that we will see tomorrow, what you do is you project the real world into a plane, and you lose the information related to the depth of the scene. Thanks to the fact that we have two eyes, actually, we are able also to build the depth of the scene. This is also using computer vision, stereo vision, you have two cameras, ok, close to each other, images, there are some techniques that allows you to reconstruct the three-dimensional composa. So, what is the idea? The first idea is that you might use information coming from some visual system to reconstruct the three-dimensional composa of the robot with respect to a horor reference frame. Once you have done this we have solved the problem because if I have the pose of the robot I can use the equilinox that we have seen so far. Right? So this approach is called position phase that we use the information coming from cameras to reconstruct the 3 dimensional pose of the robot with respect to a base frame. The second approach instead is different. What they do here in the image-based visual surveying is to assume that I'm working on the plane. And they try to project all the knowledge that we have used so far for instance, the position of the robot. I can see the arrows, the projection of this arrow into the image plane of the camera. and I try to design the algorithms directly here in the image plane of the camera okay so is a completely different approach of course I skip this why? because this is not a 3D reconstruction class we have other class here doing that once let me repeat one more time and once you have reconstructed pose of the robot there is nothing new for us. What you do is that you take the algorithms that we have already used. What is interesting for us in this class is to see if at least one class of the algorithms that we have seen so far, we are able to redesign them assuming that I'm working the image plane which is a two-dimensional space. Okay? So this is the novelty for us. Rather than to see this, that creativity is not the topic of this class. It is a sample advanced computer vision class that for sure my colleagues are operating inside the master degree programs that we are doing. Okay? This is the pictorial description of the two methods. Ok, here you take the image You use it to build 3D reconstruction Of course here you reconstruct the pose of the N-Defecto So you have an arrow which is defined in the Cartesian space We will see in few lectures how to redesign the algorithms that we have seen so far instead of having the error of defining the joint space, having the error of defining the Artesian space. Instead of the approach that we will consider here is let me project the desire. Suppose that your goal is to drive the nth factor in a design final configuration. Let me project this final configuration into the image plane of the camera. Let me compute the error between my actual position and the desired position here in the image plane. I'm able to design a controller which works directly looking at what's going on in the image plane. So we would like to provide an answer to this question. Is that okay? Actually we will see something here how to reconstruct the 3 dimensional pose and we sketch just something theoretical but then I want to spend more time with this. Okay? Just a couple of lectures, okay? Okay. Let's see the difference between these two schemes. This is the position of basis. So you take your minimums, you extract the features, you reconstruct the three-dimensional scene here you can't compute the error in the Cartesian space you can build this Condal's law is something that we are really good at doing that exploiting what we have seen so far instead of the image-based scheme you extract some feature you have the description of where the robot is just in the image plane is a projection here we compute an arrow directly in the image blade and we do like design and do control law which is a scientific challenge ok? let me spoil a little bit what is going on we work here we will use a Lyapunov approach The Lyapunov Function will be what? the sum of kinetic energy plus something depending on the arrow. But where are we measuring here the arrow? In the image plane. So you would be something depending on this arrow measured directly in the image plane. Is that okay? Okay. Here there are some steps that we need to perform, but we will see together. Ok, just a comment, what is a feature? I guess that in the computer vision class, you have seen that I can extract different features, that can be points, lines, particular shapes and so on, right? And you can associate to the image features, some feature parameters which are numerical quantities, which are associated to these features. points you can associate the coordinates in the image plane. If it is a line, you can associate the angle coefficient and so on. So there are several methods. I guess that you have seen also the general light component of an object. So there are several quantities that we can associate to the features that we extracted from the image. OK. In our class here what we assume is just the case when we extract points so let's make our analysis as simple as possible so we assume to associate these points coordinates of the points in the image so for the ones who are not faithful the computer vision class is not boring so tomorrow we will see the model of the lens just to have a normal knowledge just to see how the image is built in the image frame and we will assume that we have algorithms that keeps track of some important points inside the scene and we have the coordinates of these points in the image frame ok? It is sufficient for seeing least is sufficient for the problem of our intents. Okay. So I'm not going to apply more knowledge about the computer vision. We assume there are enough intents for us. Okay? Okay. Just the last element. So, suppose that we have just one camera in our visual system, okay? Of course, the real systems adopted in practice are much more complicated. But here I want just to give you the idea of how we use this information. So let's suppose that we have just one camera. We might have two different scenarios. And the first scenario is the case where the camera is solid and is moving attached to the manipulator. This system is called high in hand. Otherwise, there is another situation which is the situation where the camera is not attached to the robot it is fixed, some point of the environment okay is taking picture from these fixed position This situation which is the one here is called high there are also high grade configuration where you have both cameras attached to the manipulator this is a standard configuration okay all situations in the situation where you are, both the camera attached in Manipulator and the cameras which are attached in some point of the environment and they keep taking images from this position ok. these are called hybrid configuration ok there are pros and cons for both the configurations that we have ok I leave to you to read them, they are quite fast And we just conclude saying that the scheme that we consider in this class is the single eye in an configuration which is the one where the camera is attached to the manipulator, okay? So we are assumed to have just information coming from this camera. The question is how to redesign at least one class All the algorithms that we have seen here together. Using this information. So what's next? Tomorrow we will see just a few elements about how to build an image, okay, we need a bit of common background. We will see what are the coordinates the image plane. And we start to understand one possible technique to reconstruct the pose of the manipulator to the aspect of space. And we sketch just a little, which is actually quite standard, quite a useful practice. But then we switch to the user to designing the image There is a business that we are doing also, let's say that in a couple of lectures, maybe sometime more, we should be able to cover this. Let's meet tomorrow. Have a nice day. Bye bye. 