 For this lecture, I will show you the idea behind the idea of the string. We will see how to make a string out of a piece of paper. The idea is that it is a piece of paper, and the paper is the same. We need to see if the paper is the same. The idea is that the paper is the same. We need to see if the paper is the same. The idea is that it is the same. If it is the same, the paper will be the same. We will see how to make a string out of a piece of paper. We will see how to make a string out of a piece of paper. We will see how to make a string out of a piece of paper. We will see how to make a string out of a piece of paper. We will see how to make a string out of a piece of paper. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Good afternoon to everyone. So let's start with the last lecture. And we are going to conclude the material of our class. So yesterday, I started to introduce the last strategy we are going to use to control the robot when it is interacting with the environment. So if you remember what we have seen yesterday was basically an introduction of two sets of constraints. The natural constraints and the artificial constraints. OK, so we have six elements inside both sets, and both sets are composed by two subsets. OK? Let's consider first the actual constraints. What we do is to introduce all the directions in terms of linear velocities, angular velocities, along which the motion of that vector to it. OK. There are 6 minus k. Here what we do to complete this subset, we add the k directions. OK. Here we have 6 minus k and here we have k, because they are complementary subsets. Directions directions along which we don't have reaction forces or tools. OK? The artificial constraints, the set is complementing to this. Indeed, here we have the three directions along which we can have motion in terms of either linear velocity or angular velocity for the end effect. and we have the six minus k directions along which contact forces are composed. Okay. Okay. We discussed yesterday the first example where we understood, I guess, better how to build these two sets. Let's see also the second example But then we see how to use this formalism. To decide, okay. Consider the case, where do we want to turn a car? Okay, as in this figure. In this case, we have that the angle is free to rotate around the z-axis. This is the reason why we have a free angle. okay so this piece that we have here can rotate around the z-axis first of all, what do we need to do? what we need to do is to assign the preference frame okay its quite natural I would say since we have a crime rotating so this object is performing a circle so it's quite natural in my opinion to have one axis tangent to the circle one perpendicular aligned exactly with this piece of the object and one aligned with that one seems to be quite a reasonable choice So the reference frame is the one that keeps the view. And if you do. And let me just stress this fact. Look at the base frame, frame zero. OK? Which is, of course, not moving. This is stuck. If alpha is this angle, the angle by which we have rotated our crank, you can see that the only the orientation of the reference frame can be obtained from the orientation of the base frame just by performing a rotation around the second axis by an angle, ok? It should be quite clear. Okay, let's start with the natural constraints. Let's add, first, the side says, the direction along which either linear velocities or angular velocities are permitted. So we have the direction along which motion is prohibited. When I say motion, I mean, let me stress it one more time, either with respect to linear velocity or angular velocity. Let's look at the picture. Can I move along z? No. Can I move along y? Yes. So this is the reason why the x is there, but the weak y is not there. Can I move along z? No. So this is the reason why z is here. Okay? So the only linear velocity that I'm not considering is exactly py, which is the direction along which I can move. Let's consider the angular velocity. Can I rotate around x? No. Can I rotate around y? No. Can I rotate around z? Yes or no? yes, because it is a free element. So here I put just the x and y both in positive. Now we need to consider, to include to conclude, the two directions along which force or torque reaction can occur. No, cannot occur sorry, ok, are absent. Since I can move with linear velocity around y-axis. I am here for sure that y is equal to zero. Remember that we are using data phase where we don't have solutions. And since it can't rotate around the z axis, I don't have z. So my z is equal to zero. Is that okay? Let's put the direction in terms of linear velocity, angular velocity vector, along which motion is possible. I can move around the y axis, right, and actually have that the dy will be equal to a desired velocity, which is an input that we use to design my controller. OK? And possibly, it might have a lunar velocity around that. OK? typically if you don't want to have a handle spinning the desire omega x is equal to 0 okay now let's discuss that case that include, sorry the direction along which force of torques reaction force of torques can occur when interacting with the environment okay of course I might have Fx here, right? Because you expect that force along x, you do the mechanical structure of my system, I have a reaction force. Of course, since I want, I want not to stress the system, If the desired reaction force are not X, then it's going to zero. The same is true for FZ. If you try to lift the cracker, there is no way. There is a reaction force also in the space that possibly would like to have equal zero. Then I can now rotate around X. I have a torque and action. the same is true for rotation around Y. OK? Typically, again, I would like to have these values equal to zero in order to avoid useless stress. Is that OK? Now, what I want to do is to design the controller. Before doing that, let's perform these parametrizations that actually we have already seen in the yesterday's example. OK? We do the same now. Here I want just to add the vector where I select just dy and omega z. I am considering the fact that I want just to select linear velocities or angular velocity vectors that might appear, okay? So, I have these 6 by 2 metrics, okay? Selecting where, basically, when you do the product, you have this architecture with zero. dy 0 0 0 omega x. If you want to provide a physical representation with respect to the basic frame, of course what you have to do is to recontribute all the quantities in principle just by the inverse of this rotation with respect to alpha. So the rotation around z by an angle alpha is the one that allows me to go from the basic frame to the reference frame. When I perform this multiplication, I have these quantities expressed with respect to the reference frame. If you want to express them with respect to the base frame, you are to multiply by the inverse of the elementary location around z by an angle alpha. This inverse is just Rz alpha, where I expose that equation. So this justify the presence of these two matrices In this way, you are expressing these velocities with respect to the basis frame Is that ok? Yes or no? Yes or no? Ok spot but it was a simple binary matrix. Now, the reason is that if you perform, so this matrix is a 6x6 matrix ok? So you give the area 6x6 by 6x2, by the end what you have is a vector because the area divided by 2, by a vector which is is exactly that, which is six dimensional, with just two components. Which are exactly these, located exactly in the proper position. When you perform this, of course, when you multiply by these, maybe all the components are different from zero, because you are just rotating. The product of this matrix, by this is the alpha matrix. which is the minus exactly of alpha. But yesterday, we saw that we can do the same similar parametrization for the forces of the forces which arise due to the reaction of the environment. Okay. If you take these components from that we can build these 6 by 4 matrix, okay? Multiplied by these four dimensional vector where I have exactly the linear forces and the, talks that we can arise as a reactions, okay? and by multiplying by this matrix you get exactly a vector which is a 6 dimensional vector but you have fx0 fz and x and y0 ok then if I am multiplying again by this matrices what you are doing is to write this components with respect to the base frame Is that not okay? Why is that okay? The problem is that this is a block matrix, why do we have a block matrix? Because in principle here we have a three dimensional vector and another three dimensional vector, and I want to write both with respect to the base frame. So here you have exactly half minus cos alpha by the first vector. transpose alpha by the second part. Okay, what is true, again, is that if you compute the product between the transpose of the matrix by y, this is equal to 0. Why? Because the reaction forces to work do not produce work along work along the direction of the physical motion. Okay? This factor that you can verify by standard calculations incorporates exactly this factor. Because the reaction force has to be equilinear to the physical direction of the motion, so the work produced by this force is exactly proportional. Okay? Okay, let's skip the third example. Which is actually quite interesting. It is nothing but a case where you want to insert, exclude or to apply a parameter. Let's go to design the controller. Okay. We have several ingredients on the table. Notice that the situation with respect to the three motion cases, of course, is more rich. In particular, we have added a new frame, which is the task frame. This case is here, is the, if you have, for instance, because this surface is quite natural to have one axis tangent to the surface, one perpendicular. And of course, due to the fact that you have a right-hand frame, you can determine the last one. OK? Great. we have possibly you have also a sense of brain because yesterday we discussed the fact that for instance if you want to implement an impedance control like the one we have seen yesterday and you have to measure the contact force you can either have a sensor for sensor you can have some soft sensor that measures some quantities relating to the contact force You can use this measurement to derive an estimate of the motor impulse, OK? But in principle you have also a frame which is attached to the sensor that we can assume that the pull-inside, with that effect of frame, for instance, just assume it's the Y-axis. Because the sensor pulse is attached to the effect of impulse, OK? And then, typically, we have our base frame. We know that there are many other frames that we know. As you can appreciate, the work, okay? But let's say that for the moment these are the main frames that we pay attention, okay? Task frame. And the factor of frame, let's say, let's assume Michael can decide. in the forced psycho-soft frame and the basic frame of course, to design our program, we need to express all the properties with respect to the system. OK? Let's continue our analysis of all the ingredients that we have. OK? First of all, let's start from what it is, which is we have a relation expressing the dynamics of our system. Inertia matrix, p dot dot, near-distance matrix, expressed in, say 3 to the matrix, gravitational The torques applied to the joint. Plus, here I have the force, the torques applied to the fractal to see what is the contribution to the joint I have to pre-implement the transport, which is important, we know that. Here I'm looking to the model from the point of view of the joint space. Today we play with this model. Yesterday, we derived the impedance control. We derived the model from the operational space point of view. Right? Indeed, here we manipulate this expression. We have another important relation. We have the dynamics relation. But we have also the kinematic dimension, as usual, right? Here I'm expressing not just that when the natural and artificial constraints, I talk about linear velocity of a factor angle of velocity. Right? So when I have linear velocity, angular velocity in my mind, what is the Jacobian that I'm using? today? You. You if you want. Yeah, but is it geometric or analytical? The geometric. Yeah, he has the exam tomorrow with me. Okay? No way. the workup is something. OK? These are the two relations already known. We need to add something that we have just introduced thanks to the formalism of artificial natural constraints. Please remember that we are assuming that both robot and environment are infinitely distinct in this case. are not the function. OK? Perfect. We have just seen that look at this expression. Our velocity, angular velocity, angular velocity to this matrix d alpha by dy of x. I can express this as this parameterization in this case. So S dot which is this new variable that we introduced to parameterize the motion of that vector. S dot for instance in this case in the previous example example would be exactly dy omega. So the variable S is the integral of this is, we might describe it in this way. Suppose that when you move along this curve, you might have a variable S, which is defining an SUV, which is your position for instance in this curve. It's a kind of variable like this. when here you read S dot S dot for a case of whether you rotate the crank exactly the vector py ok and this matrix ds is exactly the matrix d alpha that we derive in that case ok, which provides exactly the link between linear velocity and angular velocity vector written where with respect to the base frame, we have this parameterization in that case, I'm going to put k was equal to two, okay. In the same parameterization, this is true for the reaction forces that we see are the end effect of that, which are equal to y s lambda. Remember that the tanh transpose of y is equal to zero. So now the general case, I'm calculating here, is equal to six. 6 minus K here and now what we do is to plug everything together to get our output. What is the quantity that I want to design here guys? U. This is the quantity that I want to design to satisfy some task. Okay? and in particular what are the tasks that they want to satisfy. So basically, my trajectory, the trajectory that I'm depicting will be described with respect to the variable s. S parameterizes, parameterizes exactly the direction along which the motion of that factor can occur, right? And so what I can do is to describe the motion of that effector in terms of the trajectories defined with respect to the path of x. I have, suppose—remember the case where you have the cube sliding on the gride. Okay? What you can have is a trajectory depicting acceleration, velocities, and position along the guide. This is x, t, time. What is lambda? Lambda is the vector describing the reaction force force and force let's consider again the case where you have the cube is sliding suppose that the why sliding the cube you want to exert a force why that because you know that there is some material some glue is there along the line and you want to remove it. And you know that in order to achieve this, you are to exert some force, OK? And so you have also a desired behavior of the reaction force, OK? And so what we would like to do in this case is not only to track the design trajectory for the angle factor, but I want to track also a desired behavior of the reaction forces of the process. Is that clear? Notice that when we discuss the free motion, the completely free motion, of course, the trajectory was defined either completely with a joint space or using all the possible dimensions and limitations of space. Here, I'm adopting a new parametrization Because my motion is constrained. Okay? For instance, to move the guide, or when you turn the crank, you have of course some constraints, okay? So I need a way to incorporate things. But when I use the parameterization, in some sense I'm forgetting the constraints because the fact that I am the constraints is already inside the fact that I am using this parameterization. And this is the sense. OK. So I want to use two design, sorry, use such a way that I'm able to track these two trajectories. OK? This is the goal now. And again, we will use an approach which is based on feedback and hand sense. OK? So more specifically, the controller we are going to design is the cascade of two steps. First step what we do is to design our controller U as a function of auxiliary acceleration A s and auxiliary acceleration A lambda, remember when we designed the feedback linearization in the joint space. First time we designed the u as a function of an auxiliary acceleration in in such a way that by the end, we obtain a double integrator. Now the goal is to design U as a function of these two accelerations because now I have to track a trajectory in that space parametrization, and the trajectory in the lambda parametrization. So I have two trajectories to be tracked. We will see that we can design U as a function of this such that at the end, the dynamics between S dot dot and lambda will be exactly in the case of S double integrator with respect to A S. In the case of lambda, just lambda equal to A lambda. Again, as a second step what we will do will be just to stabilize this, so how can we design A S, S lambda in such a way that S tracks S, lambda, does that look clear? Let's perform the two steps there in case you need to keep yourself. Okay? So basically we want to design a S lambda such a way that the arrow ES which is S v minus S goes to zero. and e lambda which is the difference between lambda d and lambda goes to 0. Okay? Okay. Let's assume that n is equal to m is equal to 6 and that we are sufficiently lucky that we cannot do the singular point. Okay? So nothing, so surprised. that we are already seeing in this class, so nothing surprising. I go straight to the end of the lecture, I will finish at the end. Okay. From the relation that I have summarised, we have that V Omega is equal to J Q, Q dot dot, we know that. Right. But we know also that the Omega equal to the S dot times to the new parameterization we have introduced, right? Okay? Let's take the time derivative of this and the time derivative of this. Do you see yourself inside this equation? Yes or no? Look, take the time derivative of this. Is the derivational rule for the multiplication of two point. So you have this and the same is true here, okay? What we do is to express Q dot, dot as a function of this, okay? we are working on the assumption that we are not meeting the singular points. Okay? Then what we do is to replace Q dot dot here. It's something that is a, okay? Let's substitute. Just a comment. I have used so far the parameterization for the velocities. Let's substitute fm with the corresponding parameterization in terms of lambda. OK. So we know that fm is equal to ys lambda. So I use this here. Is that OK? So of course, I'm not going to do all the calculations. but what we obtain is the following so you have that S dot dot lambda is a pre-multiply by, L by N matrix which is this one just notice this I try to explain the structure, where the structure comes from OK? You have the first block of columns is this. And then this is the second block of columns. But look. If you write down the product there, actually When you substitute here you have the presence of S Dot Dot so you have N by J inverse T right? Multiply by s dot dot. Do you agree? This is exactly, if you compute the product of these matrices by this, here is like having A, B. This is a matrix. This is the first block of columns. The second block of columns. s dot dot lambda, OK? This is equal to A s dot dot plus B lambda. This is the sense, OK? of course, the dimension must be compatible. But look at these bias that is the terms that cancels on the fact that you are multiplying by n by this. And then instead lambda has this expression, okay? This is exactly that piece that you have here, minus j transpose y, which comes from this term that you have brought on the other side of the quantity. Did you follow? So what I'm telling you is that the matrix A is exactly M, by this the matrix B is minus J transpose Y. So in this way you can see that I'm emphasizing to S dot dot lambda because I remember that the first step of the feedback minimalization the decriminalization strategy that they want to design is to design u as a function of auxiliary accelerations such that by the end, S dot dot lambda is equal to AsA lambda. So I want to have explicit the presence of this vector in my expression. Then here you do all the multiplications, and you report all the remaining terms yeah okay just do all the calculations that you get by replacing q what is obtained is that okay? I suggest you to do at least one answer these calculations please do that equal to U what is the goal now? let's design U as a function of a-X a lambda in such a way that when I replace U into this expression what I get is a relation between S dot dot lambda and this vector. Ok? The situation is the following. Let's simplify the equation. But what I want to do is exactly this Please put A here. It's the wrong place, it's not U, it's A. You want, you have, suppose that you have a system like this This Ax dot dot plus B equal to U. Okay. You want to design U as a function of the auxiliary acceleration A such that by the end X dot dot is equal to U. Difficult. This is a sub x dot dot is equal to A. If you design u to be equal to this, look. If you design u to be equal to a, capital A, small a, plus b, And you replace U here. What you have by the end is x dot dot equal to small a, right? So I have the solution. So the question is, how can I design U here such that by the end I have this relation between x dot dot lambda and this relation AsA lambda? Do you recognize that my system has exactly this shape? The matrix A is this matrix. Everything you have here compose the vector b. So I get already the solution. Because capital A is exactly this matrix. b is this vector, how to design u? how to design u? u is exactly equal to this matrix multiplied by this plus this vector or that is clear that if you design U this way, by the end you are left. So of course, the vector A that I have there is given by AS lambda, okay? If you design U to be equal to this matrix by A, which is this vector plus this vector, What you get by the end is a relation. Do I have convinced you, did I have convinced you that this is correct or not? Yes or no? OK. Now what I'm left to do is to stabilize this system. So, this is the linearizing and the coupling law. But the results are different. Now, notice, now we listen together. Don't look at the slide after this. Please clean your electronic device. Pursue someone as a lady. This is a social experiment. It works like this. OK. It's the Catholic. How to stabilize this? How to design AES in such a way that S is tracking SD? It's a double integrand problem we have already done. AES is equal to the feedforward component, prime, which is SD. not dot, right? Because if I'm in the trajectory, how to design the acceleration to be equal to the acceleration of the trajectory, right? But since it could happen that I'm not in the trajectory, what I have to do is to add, good. Good. Kb, sb dot, plus Kb. Is this correct? We have to add the error. So it's s d dot minus s d plus del p s d minus s d. OK. If you call this Es, if you implement these accelerations, what you get by the end is always the same story. Second order differential equation with constant gains. And if the gains are definitely positive, even we have the exponential convergence. Indeed, by the end, you have the ES dot dot plus 3D. Is there something wrong? Can you determine the error in the node? The SD term? SD dot minus SD. SD dot minus SD. Good point. Good. No. Without the d. Without the d. Sorry. This, because when I bring on the other side, I change the sign. Right? This should be correct. I have to leave the dot here, and I have to move the b. Right? so all right there are things that are much harder than this let's talk is this correct or wrong? let's look at the slide And F dot minus F minus F. It was correct, the previous one. It was two times SD. Two times SD. Three times B. Okay. Yes. So the first measure was correct. It was. Why not? SD dot minus SD dot. Two times SD. Two times SD. Okay. OK, now it's correct. Because if you implement this, by the end we have this. And we know that 0 is going to 0. No doubt, right? Thanks. Yes. Now what we want to make as? Because we need to stabilize the second piece. I want to stabilize lambda equal to A lambda. what do you do here? this is what you can design the solution is simpler than what is there let's forget the integral part But it should be clear that in this case, what I can do, if I put a lambda equal to lambda desire, I'm tracking it. Right? In practice, what we do is to add also the integral part. It's quite common. Just to provide the robustness. This is the feedback part, OK? Because it might happen that some measurements is not perfect and stuff like that. OK? you have the integral term. Actually, no, it is the real. You have already the sigma implemented here. No. We add the integral part. Notice that if you want to analyze theoretically the convergence of this part, what you do is the following. You replace a lambda here with this relation. lambda equal to lambda d plus K di integral lambda d minus lambda into d. So you have lambda d minus lambda. Equal to, sorry. Plus K di the integral of lambda d minus lambda. Let me write here. You can even use the error with respect to lambda. So you have e lambda plus ki, the integral of e lambda in dt. If you take the time derivative of this equation, what you have is e lambda dot plus ki e lambda equal to 0. So in this case, you can see that you have a first order differential equation. OK? So also in this case, the convergence is exponentially faster. But OK? Perfect. Notice that what we need here is the knowledge of s, s dot, and lambda. Ss dot are the components of the velocities along the admissible direction. You might have some sensors able to measure this properties. And the same is about lambda. Lambda are the reaction forces. Either you have the force sensors, force sensor, measure the lift, or you have some soft sensor techniques that allows you to, any way, reduce this quality. This is the final scheme of the hybrid control. Okay? So... The good news is that it is working. It's quite complicated, but especially for application like the one I have described, where both robot and the partner can be considered sufficiently steep, okay, this is the overall block. And actually there is a mechanism typically in practice of filtering the measurements, okay, in order to smooth them. Here we have our feedback. This feedback actually has the property that makes the system robust against noisy measurements or some small uncertainty that we have about the knowledge of the system. So the idea was let's use these two sets of constraints. Artificial and natural constraints. Okay. We have seen how to define them. So, first of all, we need to introduce the task reference, okay, frame. I have directions in terms of velocities, when I say directions in terms of velocities, I mean both the linear velocities or angular velocities. And I have direction for forces and torques for the reactions, okay? Overall, twice elements of six in one side, six on the other side, okay? But these was used for two introduce a new parameterization, okay? that we use we have seen to design text feedback synchronization's are one final component. Okay? So the idea of control is something that I might ask at the end of the final exam. But that we're writing image saying what is new, what is not new, for the final exam. Okay? Basically almost all the material of the PDF files that I have added in the material folder. There are some exceptions. Each one I'm going to do, OK? Plus, for sure, the algorithm control. And then I will let you know better, OK? Here, try to concentrate yourself more on how it works, OK? Maybe I might give you some equations and ask you to do the final deletion. So this is the reason why we are doing all these deletions. Try to make the deletion on this zero side. This is exactly what it looks like. Is there any question about this? This is the last slide and then I will tell you something more. But, just if you have any questions about what we are seeing here. No. So, this morning I have added also, I have added also a folder with numerical experiences, OK? There are two numerical experiences inside them. There are two numerical experiences inside. Inside each folder, there are two folders inside the folder numerical experiences. Numerical experience 1, numerical experience 2, generally, a big amount of relativity provided on the inside. Inside each folder there is a list of files, a matter of files. Okay? Not only there is also a tutorial PDF. So basically, try to do the two experiences following the two tutorials. Okay? One experience is about kinematics. One experience is about dynamic control. Okay? it is about true robotic arms, ok? SCARA, and UR, and blah blah blah Then, soon, I will assign, let's say, maybe, by Monday, the last robot which is based on the material that you see in the experience So basically, the award is a third experience, numerical experience, based completely on this. You have just to manipulate the files to see what we are asking you basically. We are asking to implement proper orders, OK? And to see the final results. Deadline for the last award is the 25th of June, the good deadline. We have an exam on December. 29th. 29th. I don't know. Don't remember. 29th. 29th. You're right. Come on. 25th. No. No, the deadline is 25th. If I remember well, the procedure is that the professor decides that there is a new rule. This should be the procedure, right? But 25 is sufficient here. Maybe Norway has already blamed the World Cup. Maybe all their money. When is the World Cup starting? I don't think so. It's a question for tomorrow. I am here quite often, but I'm also available any time you want to organize a Zoom meeting if you need any kind of clarification. But I envision next week probably to do with the practical part of Zoom. And I'm also available any time you want to organize a Zoom meeting, if you need any kind of clarification, okay? But I envision next week to upload some more exercises, okay? So you can practice with you the final design. I say that there will be exercises, it's really likely that the exercises will be about the kinematics part. where I can provide you with some particular structure of a robotic arm asking the designer to orient the axis. Okay? Typically what I do, because when you become older, you become also a bit more old. So typically it's providing you also a page with a figure. With the two limbs, with the axis, with the, the axis that you have. Okay. So there is no excuse for design. Okay. So you have a reference. Typically you can say that some kind of exercises can be on that part. to design some workspace, for instance. More or less is OK. Just a suggestion. If you're calculating something during the exercise, you are doing a lot of calculations. You're doing a lot of calculations. Maybe there is a shortcut to reach the final. Maybe you have to use a bit more of the brain rather than the driving field of a plane. Maybe I can ask you in a second. If you have a robot like this. to the equation that we have done. Why? The answer is a matrical, so you have the gram matrix, and the other one is the position equations according to the formula we have done. Why? The answer is? The answer is? It's a mathematical, so the gravity is 0. Because if you just translate this, you are not changing the potential mechanics. OK? It's just an example. OK? So, be prepared, instead, that the theoretical part we We have to learn more about the design of the controllers. Ok. It is obvious. Maybe I can put some questions just to see what do you understood. So, what they ask typically is to give a precise answer to precise questions. If I put four questions about one kind of controller and we have seen no right answer that you know about that controller. Ok, I want to see precise answers and precise questions. Do you have any other questions? I have several projects in my research and so I'm working a lot these days on reinforcement learning for robotics. How to make robots a bit more autonomous. I am doing this with my collaborators. Some of you has already contacted me, we are collaborating together. We have, typically we develop not only on simulations, but we have a tool of OpticArm, where we can test the algorithms to design. This is just one big field, because inside of the Optic, There are enforcement for optics that are several problems that we can consider. And then I'm working also a lot on how to make large and large-scale software suitable for optics. What is the idea? The idea is that let me give just a compass, a probe to the robot. Just to make a UNSI poll with one student. He's working in the university of Saragossa. The master piece project is the following. You send it to a quadrotto. I lost my backpack in the park. Can you send me the coordinates of where it is? So basically, the robot has to translate this prompt into a sequence of actions and to provide the plot around itself. Here the difficulty is mainly making these wonderful models that everyone has experienced how they work is impressive. But you want to make that working in a compatible way with the computational and energy resources. So we are trying to make this language model over small sets of information, stuff like that. Okay, this is another really interesting topic. I'm working a lot together with the team of five who is from India. In reinforcement learning I'm working with Alberto D'Alivera, who is some of you has already knew him, working in the control and robotic class. In April, we have a collaboration. So, it's a bit far off. It's a private research center in Bolzano. If you are interested, they can see the positions to do the thesis there. A couple of students I think were had a year performing the thesis in Bolzano working in China. But, okay, if you are interested, but the one is looking for students. And hopefully, we can say, okay. So, I would like to conclude this, saying thanks to you because, I don't know why, but I'm quite a fan of teaching. After seven years that you teach in the same class, this is the new thing. So the first time, you're super excited. And the excitement keep increasing, because you modify the material, you understand how to piece better some things, but then, this is the story, but this year I have a satisfactory... So I have a really good feelings, but really I hope that the final exam will be something satisfactory for you. Try to do the homework automatically to get the points because I seriously believe it's a good way to understand the main parts of the class. Also the numerical homework maybe is a bit challenging that homework maybe is a bit of a challenge for the ones who doesn't know. I'm glad I know that. But if you have the time to listen to the first part, there will be two parts of the homework. The first part I can see you just provide me a record. The second one is that I want to check. But at least try to do the first part which is quite doable. at least half of this model, okay? But at least the first part, maybe it can be, it's a reinforcement learning algorithm for the ones who does not know math. I provide points if you reach the objective. If you don't reach the objective, you don't have the reward. It's a reinforcement learning procedure. So there is a reward to push you to learn. You have to explore, but we've got better and better, and so on. OK? So good luck for the session of your exams, and I hope to meet you inside this room just once more time. Because it means that the results are good. Final results. We can stop here, but if you want, there are any other questions. OK. Let's meet the jury. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. I simply can't get the rest of the people to continue. I'm just going to try and get the stuff to go. Can I get this one? Oh, you can just help me with it. I just want to make this one. But I can't see you. No. I don't want to get it. No, I got that. There's a lot to it. We need to get it. What about this? I'm just going to get this. I'm just keeping it. Do you have to follow the trajectory control? For the controller, yes. To design the trajectory, I'm told that it's not something that we are seeing in the class. So you can take any approach, any idea you have. I'm fine with that. No, no, we didn't see how to design the trajectory. We had already. Just on the slide, it would be difficult. No, because if I specify, maybe I didn't write there. in the message that they sent to you, but in the class I told you. We didn't see how to design the trajectory, but I'd like to see you, if you have any idea. Actually, also if you don't search for material, you take as material the literature, you might have something in it. Okay, you design the trajectory here directly, They need us. You find the project. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. It's something that I like to do, it's outside of this, and that's it. Yes, yes, absolutely. No, no, when I did the ASUS I wanted to do it from the side to know the language. Well, yes, but not in Spanish, but... But it's the same, if you want to learn it, take the opportunity. Ah, yes, yes, I want to learn it, absolutely. Because it's a museum, it's very interesting. No, absolutely not. In fact, for the first semester I didn't participate, because all the lessons are in English, but the second year, where I had to do research in the university, I participated in this. Perfect. Thank you. We'll see each other. Have a good evening. No worries. It's been a pleasure. to NOOOOO