So today, we will see the new family of controllers, which is adaptive controllers. So basically, what we are going to assume is that we don't have precise knowledge of the model, just an estimate. But let's see how we can get rid of this part in order, in many ways, to be able to track the project. I don't think that we are able to see everything today. Maybe let's see in case you will be able to do that. OK. Will be talking today about the direct adaptive control. So we have just estimated the dynamic parameters of our system, OK? And while running our algorithm, what we are doing is also to update this estimate. And at the same time, we try to improve that estimate to reach 0. you know, okay. What is interesting behind the law that we are designing is the following. But our primary goal in this context is that of reaching 0, okay? It's not so necessary for us to have also of the true dynamic parameters of the system. Okay? So it might happen that we are able to reach 0 error, even though by the end, we don't reach the precise estimate of the dynamic parameters. We keep improving them, but we don't have guarantees that actually, we reach the exact knowledge of the dynamic parameters, but we are able to reach a zero error tracking. In this case, we talk about the direct adaptive control. Instead, if I want also to reach through the true values of the dynamic coefficients of the robot. So we need something which is more refined with respect to what I am teaching you today. And in this case, we talk about direct, In this class, I pay attention to the fact that we want to reach zero tracking error. Okay? So our goal is this. Okay. There are two ingredients with which we will play. The first one is the linear parametrization that we have seen yesterday. We have seen that we can rewrite our dynamic models as a product of the regress of y, which is a function of position, velocities, accelerations, and the kinematics parameters of our model, length of the unit of the solid multiplied by the vector phi, which is the vector containing the dynamic parameters, Which plays an important role inside the dynamics of the system. But, okay, this is the first ingredient. The second ingredient is the nonlinear control law that I mentioned. Two lectures ago, toward the end of the lecture, okay, we see this scheme by feedback optimization, which will provide. At the end of the review there is also this scheme which is more close to what we have This is a feedforward part plus a feedback part. Where some elements are going to wait on the trajectory, some elements are the actual values. And we play with this as a second entity. But I'm going to review everything. OK. Suppose that the important denominator and direct parameters, the length of the links of this stuff are known. is unknown allows us to say that the structure of the Y regressor matrix is known. But we assume to have uncertain knowledge about the big-arbitrary parameters. Which means that we have just an estimate of the pi vector. Okay, so that Y regressor is known, the pi vector we are just an approximation in our hands, just an approximation. Is that OK? OK. As usual, we have a trajectory that we want to track, OK? The goal, in presence of dynamic uncertainties, is that of designing control, which is, in any case, to track this trajectory, which means to drive this error, tracking error, to 0. OK. Let's enter a bit more into the main details of what we are going to do. And let me review one more time the ingredients. The dynamics can be conveniently read according to this linear parameterization. I'm not stressing what we have inside the pi vector. The dimension of the pi vector, first of all, yesterday if you remember, I derived this relation with the pi being 10 by n. 10 dynamic parameters for each link. And then I told you, not all of them are inside the dynamics, so expect many rows of the y regressor to be equal to 0, or don't play any role. And actually, also the elements of this 10n dimension of vector are combined with each other. So actually, we can reduce the size of pi, combining in a suitable way the elements, and neglecting some of them. So you can generate the dimension lies. Each robot has its own structure. Of course, a robot is well-known, and if you build your own robot, you have to read a bit of literature to implement a procedure that allows you, in any case, to derive this linear parameterization, which is what? Is an extremely important property that today we exploit a lot. So first ingredient, is it OK? Just a comment for yesterday. OK, as it is reported here, pi is in general a combination of the robot physical parameters, not necessarily all of them, as we discussed. Vector pi today, we have just an approximation of it. We don't have the precise numbers. Remember that inside of pi, we have knowledge related to mass, to inertia, to the position of the body centers. Okay, yesterday, this was the elements which were combined inside the components of the body. Yesterday, I didn't stress this part, let me do it now. The modeler regression matrix, y, depends linearly on the acceleration. it's quite clear the acceleration of B is just linear. So we expect that it appears in the same way inside the y matrix, quadratically. Of course, we adopt the design of the same treatment for the linear factor. And you have no linear when the yaw period here. when we had right-moved joints, then we have the sine, the cosine of the value of the joint. Okay. It was just to add one more element. So please, first ingredient. Let's discuss what is the second ingredient. To do that, let me just briefly review the story of the trajectory control part that we have seen two lectures ago Tuesday morning, okay? If you remember, before the writing of the feedback minimization scheme, I told you, what we can do is to follow the general path that I'm talking about. Let's build our controller as the sum of two contributions. The forward part. What is what you do? What is what you do? When you have perfect knowledge of the model, you are exactly on the trajectory to be tracked. So in this case, what you have to do is to implement this, which is exactly the model evaluated on the trajectory. Supposedly, you have perfect knowledge here of all the dynamic quantities here. Which means to have exact knowledge of d, c, g, and so on. If you are exactly on the trajectory, you implement your control to be this, and you stay there. There is no other chance, no other way. It's the fit for what? But then, since we know that there are ascending, this is what we do is to add the proportional derivative control. and this was the first strategy, which followed a standard path, like what you do, right? It's good. It has some good, local properties. Practice is worth it. I'm sorry, I'm away. OK. So. But we see through math that we can do something which is global, in particular this table, which is the feedback linearization. Here let's suppose we derive the laws, just assume that we have precise knowledge of the C, G, F, okay? And I'm not going to repeat how we derive it, we take a different path, okay? First, we implement our control u as a function of an auxiliary control in such a way that we are able to linearize the dynamics of the joint with respect to the new auxiliary control. This is a double integrator. At the beginning of the Tuesday lecture, I told you how to stabilize a double integrator, OK? Following the standard path to the forward contribution and vice versa, feedback and contribution. Okay, we don't have precise knowledge of the that we get we get those in presence of approximation of this quantity if we get the linearity not neglecting the non-linearity we don't have a precise w what you can expect is that you just reach a neighborhood of the desired project okay? You are quite close You stay there, you are inside a tube around the desired trajectory. The smaller the center is, the smaller the tube. The greater the center is, the greater the tube is. It's quite easy. And you can do also some analytical computations to prove this data, okay? Of course, since we have a just estimate of these quantities, What I have in my hands is just a distribute of the pi. OK? So we denote by pi hat the fact that we don't have the precise knowledge of the components of pi, but just in a proximity. OK? So now, after yesterday's lecture, When I talk about the model, I can't both refer to the knowledge of BCGF or to the knowledge of pi. It depends from which point of view you look at the model. Is that OK? So you can either pick this or you can pick this. It depends on how you are describing your model. Is that OK? So do the math. Okay. There is something that makes it difficult to make adaptive. This is a law. Adaptive means that while you are taking data, you use the data to improve the knowledge of this method. Sometimes it's difficult to have a reasonable strategy working in real time. Remember that here, we will look at this control of 1 kilohertz. So if I are, you should rather control or a learning strategy which updates the knowledge of this quantity in a quite fast way. But the problem is that in some cases, it could happen that the estimate that you have here, multiply it by some of the gains, it's obtaining actually the opposite matrix. So it's something that I worked with one of my PhD students. We try to estimate, there are some techniques that are quite elaborate. What we try to do, to estimate the inertial matrix. And the inertial matrix we know is the definite positive matrix, which means that only eigenvalues are greater than 0. But for some robot in some configuration, some of these eigenvalues are extremely small. So suppose that the smallest eigenvalue is 0.001. And actually, you provide a really good estimate of the inertia matrix, but your smallest eigenvalue is minus 0.001. So the difference is extremely small. But the fact that one eigenvalue has a different sign makes this matrix not anymore a definite positive matrix. And actually, the fact that you change the sum here, but you keep with the same sign the gains is creating a lot of instabilities inside of it. The whole is something that you cannot appreciate through some numerical implementations. Just to give you an example that tried to make this law adaptive, there are some issues that you might pick up on. Then people decided, let's change the rule to make, to design something which is adaptive. The war was more or less at 10 in the morning on Tuesday I introduced this law almost at the end of the lecture, right? Okay, there is another interesting law, okay? We have seen feedback, feed forward plus feedback, has good local properties. I show you the feedback linearization strategy which has stability when you have the first terminologies. And I told you there is also another law, which is a nightly law. Okay. Which has also global asymptotically stability. And look at the first four elements. These are really close to the feedforward components, right? Because basically here you have the model, What is the difference? The difference is that the elements inside the BCG are not evaluated on the desired trajectory, but they are evaluated on the current position velocities that you have, right? While the other terms here, the linear elements, are still evaluated on the desired trajectory. It's a kind of hybrid feedforward for four. And then here, we have again, the proportional derivative control, as a free vector. And I told you, through some sophisticated tools that you can study for linear control, we can prove that this law is again a global asymptotically stable. Of course, I skipped the point. Just giving you the idea. But to remember how this law is built, Remember, let me take the feedforward component. And instead of evaluating everything on the desired trajectory, let me evaluate bcg on the current trajectory I am performing, while the other elements, here, here, here, are evaluated on the desired trajectory. let me have the feedback and start back over. Okay? This is the second, almost the second ingredient. Actually what do we do to manipulate the activity? And I will tell you in a wider lecture. Of course when you don't have the perfect knowledge of the dynamic parameters, what you have is you have just an approximate make the knowledge of BCGF. Okay. So is the reason why we have yet so today I want to stress the fact that we don't have the precise knowledge of this quantity. This is the scenario where we are working. Okay. So I need to modify this law into this law. Is that okay? This is the law that I'm applying using the approximate knowledge that I know. And what they want to do is to build an adaptive version of this law. There is a drawback that I just mentioned to you and that I recommend you also do, as usual, a simple example of how to modify this law in order to make it also robust with respect to this drawback. Are you following me so far? So I'm interested in this law, where you're just an approximate knowledge of the dynamic parameters. And what I want to do is to have a procedure that allows me to update the dynamic parameters. So what I do is to update the variant. When you want to update a quantity, okay, if you provide me an updating law, The way is to tell me how this derivative is changing over time, okay? By integration, you can keep track of the current value that you have about Pi hat, is that okay? So typically what we do today, when I told you that I want to keep updating Pi hat, is to provide an updating law for Pi hat dot, for the derivative of Pi hat, okay? The interesting fact is the following, that designing pariart in a suitable way as we are going to do hopefully today, maybe Tuesday morning, let's see how much time we have. This is the following fact that you have a really reasonable which is really good in making your velocity skewed off to track the design velocity Q dot desire. Okay. So of course, only two arguments. So which means that is going to zero, but unfortunately the same is not happening on the position. Okay, so by the end you have a drift on the position, even though the velocities are the correct one. There are some particular strategies, some particular configuration of the robot where this situation is happening. Okay? Isn't that clear? I know that is a bit for me why this is happened, but there are some particular situation where this is going to happen, and a way to get rid of these is instead of looking to the desired trajectory, Qd, we provide the robustification of the trajectory, where we substitute qb dot with this qr dot, so now we call this reference velocities a new velocity. Well, basically what we do is do add to the design velocity, in addition of the term where this gamma is a definite positive matrix, it's a gamete, which the base also has a So the idea can be understood in a really simple example. But the idea can be taught by looking at this example that I never really used. OK? 


Look. You want to track this green mass, which which is going at this speed Qd dot. But you want to be overlapping with this green mask. You have the yellow mask. Suppose that you provide me just Qd dot as a reference velocity to be tracked. U is the force that you apply in this scale. dot the block scale of the component is the force that you apply. Of course, what we would like to do here, ignore that. Suppose that you are behind the green mass, so there is an error here that you want to reduce to 0. Of course, what you want to do is to provide a force to the yellow mass in order to accelerate it in order to reduce this error. Right? Is this strategy working? So suppose that you measure the velocity error, q dot is your velocity. Qd dot is the desired velocity that you want to graph. So concerning the green mass, I just tell you what is the desired velocity. It should work. OK? And of course, this strategy is not working, because suppose that you are behind this mass by a distance e, which is greater than zero. But here, your speed is qd dot. This quantity is equal to zero, which means that you are not actuating your yellow mass with any force, right? And so this yellow mass will continue to go at the velocities which is qd dot. but it is behind the green mass of the distance e, which is greater than 0. We have already discussed this example. What is the idea? Let me provide the reference velocity to the yellow mass to be tracked, which is the desired velocity plus an additional term, which depends on the position error. Okay? Because in this way, gamma is the gain, is greater than zero. So, if I design the force to be applied to the yellow mass to be equal, in this case, to the difference between the new reference velocities minus the current velocities, just to do this simple calculations, you can see that you have the sum of two contributions. A contribution which is due to the actual difference between the two velocities. But you have also the additional term here, which is due to the distance. And as soon as you have here a distance which is different from 0, you keep actuating the yellow mass with the force, which tries to reduce the arrow to 0. Okay? So the trick that we are going to use to modify the previous controller in this case instead of considering the desired velocity Q dot What we do is to include inside of the controller is a method reference velocity qr, which is equal to the desired velocity plus this additional control. Okay. So let me go back. We substitute qd dot and of course, this has consequence also, QD dot dot. By QR dot, which is QD dot plus gamma, which is multiplied by their position. Is that okay? It's gamma. Yes. Is there anyone who studied Greek at school? There must be at least one. Oh, this is gamma? It's lambda. Lambda. Gamma is this one. I'm really tired, so. Oh, lambda. Lambda. Just one who studied in Greek. I don't believe it. There must be someone else. No? Are you sure? Yeah. So what did you start? When did you start? But a mother of the the product between the derivative gain, the inverse of the derivative gain multiplied by the proportional gain. This is a choice that we need to do in order to have a really beautiful book. You will appreciate the reason. What time is it? Already done this? Okay. Just a few considerations. Oh no, okay let's do this, I think. Okay, so instead of looking for these, we will see this blog. Okay? Well, we made a visa substitution in place of qd. Dot, dot, dot, dot, dot, which is the one that you obtain and taking the time derivative of visa. Okay? In place of qd dot, we put the qr dot. So we discuss the convergence of this property. We have this new law. Suppose that we have a perfect knowledge of the dynamic parameters. The question that now we pose you in the ideal condition where we have perfect knowledge of BCGF is this law converging? Is this law globally asymptotic? Is a global asymptotic law, yes or no? The answer is yes. And actually the proof, to prove the convergence of these is much easier than this. This is the reason why we are going to see the proof of this. Because it is an important rule that we will use, also to design the adaptive law. Just to stress you, we are in the ideal case where we have the perfect knowledge of the Klemak theory. Is that okay? So let's do a bit of math, okay? What we did here was extremely simple. just the first so we are going to do in this way there is a discussion about that I hope that it should be possible now we baptize k d inverse k b equal to lambda And then that we call sigma. This is equal to Q tilde dot plus lambda Q tilde. Okay? Why we do this substitution? Because based on this new quantity, we can rewrite the overall dynamics in a more compact way. First of all, notice this factor, Sigma is dis. Okay? Let's compute QR dot. References. So QR dot minus Q dot. QR dot is equal to QB dot, plus, plus lambda q tilde, not distracted, this is q tilde, this is the distraction between the desired position and the current position, okay? Minus q dot. Okay? Good. What we can see is that if you compute qd dot minus q dot, anywhere qp the dot plus lambda qp. This is exactly the sigma. Okay? So I needed these calculations to show you that q dot minus q dot is exactly equal to sigma. The new quantity that I have introduced here defined in this way. Okay? So sigma can be seen also as the difference between the new reference velocities minus the current velocities. Ok, great. The next step is to observe that according to the new definition of sigma, observing that vB inverse A B is exactly equal to lambda, this is sigma, so again, we can I find the dynamics here. My controller is up in this way. Let's suffer just a couple of minutes and then we have the break. OK? So what I want to do now is to replace this controller inside the dynamics of my system. And to see if it is converging. So what I do is this is my dynamical model. this is my controller. Let me replace you here with my controller. OK? What I obtain is this expression. And now I do some manipulation, which actually are not difficult. What I do is to take all the elements that I have in the right hand side, on the left hand side, and you can rewrite the overall dynamics in this way. OK? QR dot minus Q dot is sigma. QR dot minus Q dot is sigma. QR dot dot minus Q dot dot is sigma dot. And so what I have is that now, the dynamics of my system, So the dynamics of the system combined with the controller that I have here, provides me these differential equations. And I want to prove the stability of this. What we do is to resort to the Lyapunov meter. So what I do is to take Lyapunov function, can be determined by the two equations. The atom of action is given by the sum of two contributions. Kinetic energy. In this case, notice that here I don't have q dot dot, I have sigma dot. So it defines the kinetic energy for this system, which speaks in terms of sigma, as the function, what happens? Instead of having q dot, you have sigma. Sigma transpose with q sigma, plus a quadratic form, which depends on the tracking error. So you give the transpose m. What is m? m is a positive definite matrix, as usual. We can see this is a degree of freedom. the side of the design to force greater than 0. Is this function nice for our scope? I would say yes. Because as soon as q tilde, sigma, one of the two is different from 0, is strictly greater than zero and it is equal to zero if and only if both Sigma and Qtilde is equal to zero. Okay? But if Qtilde is equal to zero, and also Sigma must be equal to zero, this implies that also Qtilde dot is equal to zero, which means that the minimizer of my quadratic function is exactly the point where the position error is equal to zero. And in this point, I have also the velocity arrow equal to 0, which means that eventually, if the time derivative of V dot along the trajectory is strictly negative, I will reach exactly this point. So I reach the point where the tracking arrow is equal to 0 with 0 velocity arrow. Perfect. is what they want, right? So what we need to do now is to take the time derivative. Okay? Let me go a bit faster, okay? You know I got it. Take the time derivative of E. This is the expression. If you have some troubles in your speculation, please ask me. No way that we put these days. Okay. Take the time to be now, we need to put the stacks that we have already seen. Eq sigma 0. The came right up. In this fashion code is a from the model. You remember, we are already done. these kind of calculations. dq, sigma dot, is this quantity. And remember that they can exploit the fact that d dot minus twice c, this matrix, has a strong property. In this case, let's suppose that the c matrix is designed according to the Christoffel symbols. So it is a skew symmetric matrix. Do your calculations. please do that here. So replace eq, sigma dot, with this expression. And it's following the fact that I am assuming that then this is skew symmetric matrix. You did, you do some calculations. And by the end, you have this expression. OK? You cannot see the calculation in your mind. you have to write a couple of numbers, but do that. Is a semi-trivial problem. Okay? Do you like that expression? Because this F is the diagram. Let's suppose that those of you in this diagram, they are positive. So this is negative. I make them about that. But I don't know what's going on here. And yet you'd be the transport. And it's definitely positive. But if this would be like my QT dot, I don't know anything about the sign of these. Right? So. The situation is not still clear. Okay. First of all, remember M, I have a degree of freedom in designing. What I do is a 2 to the n equal to twice lambda kB. And let me split this. I go quite fast, but all the steps are, you can follow on the slide. Let me go straight to the exercise. Is what we did, and can be rewritten exactly in this way. And what will we do here? Only in this term, only here, we substitute sigma with its definition, which is the one that you have. OK? You do the calculations. You do the calculations. And by the end, you obtain that d dot has this expression. Here I have destroyed the fact that I have substituted sigma only here in this expression, and I have destroyed the fact that I have chosen m to be equal to this particular matrix. Maybe you might ask me, how do you decide all these things? It's the spinors. It's a triangle, OK? You smell that the Jarnot function is good. OK? Actually, maybe you run some simulations. You see that it is always negative. OK. And you try to exploit the degree of freedom to do some manipulations. You get this expression. Now, you can tell me if this is good or not good. V dot. Good means that it must be? Negative. Negative. Is the first term negative? Yes. Is the second term negative? Yes. Is the third term negative? Look at the matrix, they are all diagonal with the elements positive. So yes, lambda Kd, lambda is a diagonal matrix with all the elements positive. Also the third term is negative. Perfect. Here I am converging exactly toward the point where Q tilde, Q tilde dot is equal to zero. Is that ok? Ok. Before we make the brand, we did a lot of things. Let's just summarize what is important. Ok. The main steps. Just a few minutes. And then we have the time, at least to see the law for adaptive photography. So we will define this law. Okay? That from theory, through a lot of math you can prove that it is converging globally. This law is a hybrid of feedforward theorem plus a feedback. And we discussed it. Okay? I told you that when you don't have precise knowledge of these terms, what's going to happen in practice is that under difficult, strong, ugly assumptions of the gains, you can prove that you can convert to the desired velocity, but there is a drift on the position. Okay? I want to get rid of this problem. The idea is that to, in place of the desired velocity, qd, let me put a bigger velocity that in principle should be able to get rid of the binders. OK, and so we introduce a new reference velocity, qr dot, which is the following. The one I put inside the green rectangle. OK? Think about the simple example of the two axes. We replace Qt dot with Qr dot, and Qt dot dot with Qr dot dot. And what I wanted to prove was that this law, under the little condition where I have the precise knowledge of Tc, Gf, is again a law in the global asymptotic convergence property. And we derive a Lyapunov function. We did a lot of calculations. And we do not want to be what is the next step? Guess is, let me put here the help. So I'm just an approximate knowledge of the dynamic parameters. How to modify the knowledge of these parameters while running the algorithm in such a way that I'm still able to drive my second 10 minutes. 10 minutes. Okay, 36. So, here we have the system menu. This is the system menu. I'm adjusting the values because I don't want to lose the system. So, what should I do here? This is the menu. Ok, that's fine. I'm a little bit clumsy with the values. this is orange, and overlaid with red and this is overlaid with red exactly, this is the separate sign it's a bit dark, you can't see it and, this is the welcome design these are the two initial settings this is the system then, there is still an ISO here, the ISO here is the ISO and here is the ISO that one, that's the ISO and that one is the reaper i need to set up the graphics this i can do this i can do this i can do this is the workspace i was looking because i don't understand so, it's easy this is the addable color look, there are two It's a second target, this should be the first part, this is the second target, and this is the maximum it can reach. What is this second bar? Which one is the second bar, the other one? It should be here and then you can add the alcohol Yes, it should be here and then you can add the alcohol This one is a little reddish If I want to add more alcohol I can take it off Here I can see.. I'm in the line-up, I'm in the line-up in this way Ok, this way Ok, let's change this this way is actually better I mean now you have the same no, now you have the same good, good no, you are the one the graphics this I was looking at the graphics the graphics are invisible I don't have the same you put too much no, no the graphics are invisible which is invisible? this is invisible but I'm trying to focus on me is it great? no, it's better this is better than the old no, it's better So, what is the goal of this second part of the lecture?


 Let's look at the first equation. This is exactly the law that we have just discussed in the first part. we prove that under ideal conditions, which means under perfect knowledge of P, C, F, G, is a global asymptotic state of flow. Okay? Now, the real scenario that is of my interest is that I am just an approximate knowledge. Okay? I told you, I can look at the model from two points of view. as the Q dot, dot, blah, blah, blah. Or why multiply by Pi. Let's consider the second scenario. So actually instead of writing my model, that I have here in this way, I write it as the product between the regressor and the approximated knowledge of the Pi vector. Okay. Since I don't have perfect knowledge is that something approximate look the one fact that you just use of both but actually notice that here I have the combination with you here. If you don't, he's here, you are told, here you are. Don't be. So actually the shape of that aggressor is the same, but you have to pay attention that sum of q dot must be substituted by q dot, and q dot dot must be replaced by q dot dot. The second one, third one sorry, you should have to face with this fact. Okay? Anyway, my control law is this, is this law converging? Now what I expect is that since I have an approximation of knowledge of Pi, really likely I'm going to converging to more than just a neighborhood of the desired sample. And what I want to do is to update while rounding the algorithm the knowledge that I have about Pi in such a way to reach zero tracking error. Is the goal clear? This is the reason why we talk about adaptive control. Because while running the algorithm, I'm updating the parameters of my system in such a way to improve the performance. Okay? So this is my law. Okay? Now what I want to do is to replace this law inside the dynamics of my system. Okay? And to try to understand how I can't update the knowledge of the pi hat vector. So what I want to provide you is an updating law of this form. So I want to tell you how to update in continuous time the vector pi hat, which means to provide the exact time derivative of pi hat, which means how I'm varying continuous time this vector. I mean, possibly they know how to do that. So let's do some of them right. So let's replace the control law inside here. Okay? What you get is this expression. Now, it's late in the afternoon. I show you how to move from an algebraic point of view. Let's skip the calculations. They are quite standard. After two thirds of the class, you are able to do this calculations. Let's go straight to what is really interesting for our school. Okay? So let's do a trick. Look at these terms minus b cube q r dot dot. Minus c cube q dot q r dot minus f q r dot. Let's add these triplet of terms here and here. So I'm not affecting the equality of the two sides. If you do that, it should be quite clear. Here you can write this term as bq, which multiplies q dot dot minus q r dot, right? And the same is true for the other terms. So the left-hand side can be then exactly this way. What is q dot minus q dot? Or minus sigma? Sigma is q dot minus q dot, so it's minus sigma. Look at the right-hand side, the right-hand side, instead take this term and this term, you can rewrite it as the difference between we have q minus bq multiplied by q r dot dot. The same is true for the other terms. Here you have the difference between the estimate that you have and the true value of the b matrix and concerning the c matrix, concerning f matrix. Is that okay? So what you have is exactly this expression. remembering these fact, actually what you can do is change the sign of everything. So here you have BQ, Sigma dot CQ, Q dot. Sigma F, Sigma, okay. And also that we take a KD sigma, let me bring on the other side. Why is it last? Because here I had assumed we have changed the sign of all the terms, okay? Just to add the expression in sigma. And let's recall b hat minus b as b theta. Okay? And c hat minus c, c theta. f hat minus f, f theta. This is the what the model is that I have about B, C and F, and G also of K. And you can rewrite the right-hand side exactly introducing the tilde quantities, which are the model of this function. Is that OK? We are almost done. Notice that what you have on the right-hand side is basically a dynamical model which speaks in terms of the d-th, c-th, f-th, g-th, i-th. So I can write the linear parameterization for this model, which will be a function of what of the model mismatches pressing with respect to the pi vector, which is pi the. So here on the right hand side, since this is my dynamical model with respect to the model mismatch, what I have is that the model mismatch is written in an equivalent way also as pi hat minus pi, it is pi theta. OK, so here, exploiting the linearity of my system, I can write the right-hand side as minus the regressor multiplied by pi tilde. Is that OK? Perfect. I have this expression. Did you follow me? Now let's analyze this system through the diacono theory. What I need to do is to introduce what? A diacono function. Kinetic energy and quadratic terms, which depends on the arrow. So you'd be there also. So what are we going to do is it means to be sure that which is the pencil is more than this match. Which is the value of model. So the idea is the following. If this was the, the angular function that I use in the case where I didn't have the model mismatch, let me add an additional term, an additional term to this diagonal function which accounts also for the model mismatch. Is that okay? And so m, we defined it in the previous cases to be equal to twice lambda kb, right? by the end of we use, I want to be equal to this product of matrices that I'm assuming to be the lambda. Let me add an additional quadratic term, which is 1 upon pi pi to the transpose k pi pi to the n. k pi, of course, is a definite positive matrix because I want to add there a quadratic term. Is that okay? What we do now is to take the time derivative, then in place of bq sigma dot. We replace something and so on. I think that it should be this way. OK? Let me go fast. This is the time derivative. That we reach substituting in place, Because I remember that you have the time derivative, which is dq sigma dot. Embrace on dq sigma dot, you put this expression. OK? You do the calculations. You do all the calculations. After some math, what you get is exactly this. OK? Who you like, let's discuss together. What about this term, it's good? Everything which is negative, negative in this case means it's extremely good. Good. This is a diagram, diagram, diagram. Everything's positive. What about the other thing, right? Because I can decide how to update my data, right? This is the rule. The rule that I implement in order to update the pi hat vector. And in particular, And we have inside the parentheses that it's gate by by the dot minus the transpose of the regression multiplied by sigma. Let me forget the dependence of y transpose on q dot q dot q dot dot dot. Okay, just keep the notation. And if this is equal to 0, suppose that this term is equal to 0, are you fine with the rest of the time derivative? Yes. This is superlook, and in particular, it is converging toward the which point? The point where Q tilde must be equal to 0. Q tilde dot must be equal to 0, which implies that also sigma is equal to 0, so I have the fact that the tracking error is converging exactly to 0. Can I make this term equal to 0? Yes. Actually, in this term to be equal to 0, I'm designing exactly the adaptive law that I want. pi tilde dot equal to k pi inverse multiplied by y transpose c. Is that OK? This is what I decided to do. Pi tilde is equal to pi hat minus pi. Pi is a constant. It's the vector of the decambing parameter. When I take the time derivative, this is equal exactly to pi hat dot. so what I have here is exactly phi r dot which is the updating law that I have today the knowledge that I have about the phi r dot Okay? What is the definition of Sigma? Sigma is equal to So you can find the dot. But for the other one, this could be there. So the class, can you dictate when you get lambda here? Yeah. You see the value plus lambda. in that. So notice that the sigma depends on the error velocity [? position ?] and the velocity errors. This is the regressor that I know, but the regressor is evaluated on these four quantities. So please keep in mind this factor. And here you have just this matrix, which is invertible because by definition, this is a definite positive. Okay? So using these update below for the rector pi dot you have a dot is the sum of three elements which are all negative. D equal to 0 only if you then give the dot are equal to 0. Why? So I proved the convergence to work with what I want. Okay? Now, the question is, is pi hat converging into pi? I don't know. actually, we don't have the time today, I guess. But we'll be discussing the same goal maybe Tuesday morning, when I show you that I'm not converging to the right estimate of the dynamic parameters, but the error is going to zero. Here I don't have a guarantee that pi naught is converging to pi the only because notice that V dot, V dot does not have the presence of pi tilde. Right? So I define V as a function of also pi tilde V dot does not have the dependence of pi tilde. so the diagram of theory is telling me that I'm converging towards the points where v tilde is equal to 0. Sorry, v dot is equal to 0. Then in this case, are the points where q tilde, q tilde dot are equal to 0, but I'm saying nothing about q tilde, okay? The only element that I can use is that since q tilde, are going to 0, sigma is going to 0, which means that the time derivative of pi hat is going to 0, which means that I'm reaching a constant value. So pi hat is converging to a value. It's not, for instance, exploding, going to infinity. But I have the convergence of pi hat toward a vector pi bar. but I'm not sure that pi bar is exactly equal to pi. In many cases, this is the situation. But there are situations where, actually, you improve the knowledge that you have about pi, but you don't have the guarantees that you are converging toward the perfect analysis of pi. OK. So let's discuss that. This point. So when you are at the equilibrium point, which means that basically also you here is equal to zero. So this term is equal to zero, which means that you are not moving. Notice that this equation is equal to zero, not only if Pi hat minus Pi is equal to zero, but we know that as soon as Pi hat minus Pi, which is Pi tilde, belongs to the kernel of this, this identity is equal to zero. So just to justify you that you might reach a configuration, a second configuration, where Paisley is always inside the parallel of the Lagrangian. OK? So in this case, you have that you reach 0 error tracking without having reached the perfect knowledge of the dynamic parameters. Okay. If you want to add also this element, what you need to do is to design a different strategy. Okay? You need to refine I don't control any such weight. Also, I got this. Okay. Okay. So just pick up a number of marks. If you have time to see also this example. You cannot wait two days to see this example, okay? But we have still time, Let's do that. Actually, I could finish at 6.10, right? So just a couple of remarks. Actually, actually, we can establish some conditions under which we know that by art is converging to public. What is the important part? We have a trajectory that we want to track. Okay? If this trajectory is sufficient reach to excite all the modes of the system that all the dynamics parameters are playing a role. Then in this case, our scheme is sufficiently rich to guarantee also this path. If you have a linear system, there are conditions that how to select a trajectory in such a way to excite all the dynamics of the system. But in the nonlinear systems this is a extremely difficult problem. So you know if the trajectory that you want to track is sufficient in the system of the end of the process. There are no theoretical conditions, unless you have a really specific problem. Okay? For you can explore a particular structure of the non-linear system that allows you to verify this, okay? In the linear system, you can say something that is just a post-productive condition that guarantees you, okay, how to have a perfect identification of your system. Okay? Let me discuss this example. It's quite interesting to understand that at this point. Do you have any questions so far? So I'm going quite fast, but I will come back on Tuesday morning to summarize the entire story about the last day control. Because I can understand there will be so many items. So on Tuesday morning, I promise that we You have to memorize it by the steps. Is it still the case that we have one of the best in the world in science? Then it won't assert. We can always have a zero? Yes. So we become dispassionate in that point? No. Because my goal is that there is a packing. I report the zero. You should ask her. OK, but in real life, it clears both ways. If we look at the control law, based on that we can see that our tracking down is going to zero. But in the real life, we need to know the dynamics as they correspond to it. No, it's not true. how long did they go long that you have? If I want to ask you a question. You are to do something else. No. What you can do is to take the, to pose this problem as a justification of why. And so basically, what you have to do is to excite the system with a sufficient, with a reach, for example. OK? in such a way that all the dynamics are excited. Indeed, actually, what I'm telling here is that if the trajectory that you want to track is sufficiently rich, actually you obtain also this result, even though it's not your primary goal. But if the trajectory that you have to track is sufficiently complex, that running the algorithm But you need to know the dynamics in that case, don't you? No. This is the beauty of the controller, that actually I don't need all this precise knowledge of the model to get what I want. This was the controller that I told you today is one of the most famous adaptive controllers that you can find paper by Slobin and I don't know Some decades ago, it is a super-sighted paper. Just because I discuss exactly these ideas, OK? But it's not true that we do always need to know entire dynamics. I would like to make this very obvious, that if I want to estimate the dynamics of rational production, I need to cover this part? No, we are not covering this part, because he had the knowledge just to investigate. Yeah, if you want to have a precise knowledge of the parameters, what we have to do is to cast this problem as a identification problem, like a least square problem, as we discussed yesterday when you had the model. But the most interesting part for people working in robotics is to understand the shape of Y and the vector of Y, because it's extremely difficult. Then once you have this structure, you have understood how to combine the dynamic parameters. Typically, what you do is to run trajectories of different values of frequency. You run a sinusoidal trajectory at the joints at different frequencies such a way to have a sufficiently rich Let's discuss the example and then if you want you can stop here to discuss more but at least to conclude the lecture Ok? So, here we have our controller, this is the example You have the inverse pendulum, ok So this model here will be the right beta, here what is added with respect to the model we discussed so far for the inverting volume pendulum is the presence of the discretization. Fd the coefficient multiplied by theta dot equal to U. Okay, what is the linear parameterization here? It's not difficult to figure. This theta dot dot, the sine of theta, theta dot will reply the vector of dynamic parametric density, which is a three dimensional vector. Inertia and gd is better than e. Remember that the inertia is the inertia seen from this axis, OK? So it includes all the terms that we discussed together yesterday in the simple example. OK? Okay? So, the controller that we have is given by the expression of U and the adaptive law for Pi hat. Okay? So, here we should go back. So basically I combined these two laws. we come back with more details on Tuesday morning also the example. But what we have here is the combination of the two laws. If you run here you have all your gains and so on. But I want to discuss with you just a couple of examples. Just to see what's going on. These are the real coefficient value. Suppose that this are your initial estimates. Okay. You set your control parameters I didn't put any constraints on the parameters, I just assumed that they are positive, strictly positive, okay? So we have five. There are two trajectories that I would like to track. The first trajectory is a sinusoidal trajectory, defined on the Theta-Ogle. The second trajectory is assigned in terms of the desired acceleration, is a time-bound acceleration profile, okay? is equal to 1 minus 1, 1 minus 1, you keep alternating between the two values with this frequency. In your opinion, what is the trajectory which is more rich, more exciting? Here you have just one frequency inside the position trajectory. Yeah, this should be a bit more exciting. Okay. Let's go see that the first one. This is the result that you have in terms of tracking error. The blue line is the position error, the green line is the velocity error. As we can see, they are going to 0. Okay, let me see if there are the initial conditions. Okay, we start from 0 position, 0 velocity, which means that if this is the desired trajectory that you want to track, the time T, the sine of 0 is 0. So at the beginning, the position error is 0. What about the velocity error? So the time derivative of this is the minus cosine of the right, and when you evaluate the 0, the velocity at the beginning is minus 1. Our velocity is 0, so at the beginning, the error of velocity is minus 1, which is exactly what you can see in the figure. The position error is 0, the velocity error is minus 1. You run our, your algorithm, and you see that the derivatives are converging to 0. Okay? Let's consider the bandwidth trajectory, which is defined in acceleration. Okay? Theta dot dot is our. Again, look at the position are velocities errors converging to zero? Yes. Notice that the behavior is a bit more nervous. Just a consideration about the torque, which is the U component that we apply to our system. Look in the case we want to track a sinusoidal projectile. We have a periodic behavior. But we don't have a sinusoidal, why? It's almost a sinusoid. Because I had the gravity compensation curve that breaks this sinusoidal structure. Look here in the bank bank control. Of course, the behaviour of the torus is extremely dynamic. Let's consider the convergence of the estimate of the parameters. This is the first case. Here, I'm plotting the error of the estimate. Okay? Remember, I have three dynamic parameters, the inertia, the blue one, and Mgd is the green one. Fp minus Fv hat is the red one. You can notice that, I could say with respect to the initial estimate I'm improving in others. Actually I am estimating correctly the friction coefficient. But I am not estimating correctly these two parameters that is still assigned. Look at the behavior in the value bank strategy. By the end, I am comparizing also to the true estimate of the distance. But in any case, also in the first case, I converge to r equal to zero, though, I'm not converging to exact knowledge of the part. I'm improving a bit, I would say, but they are not going to zero.