 It is important to note the professor may not be a native speaker. The lecture is to be in English. The professor may be speaking in English. Therefore, the lecture is to be in English. Remember that the professor may be speaking in English. The professor may be speaking in English. The professor may be speaking in English. The professor may be speaking in English. The professor may be speaking in English. The professor may be speaking in English. The professor may be speaking in English. The professor may be speaking in English. The professor may be speaking in English. Good afternoon, everyone. So let's move towards the last part of the class, which is the interaction of the robots with the environment. Before addressing this topic, we need to make silence. I can see the room. So we need to rewrite some of the control code that we have seen, looking at them from a different point of view. So so far we have derived a lot of control algorithms looking, working in the operating joint space, because it is extremely natural to do that. But when the robot is interacting with the environment, we know that this the end effect which has this interaction with the environment. So actually it's better to look to our situation from the operational space. Okay. So instead of writing our algorithm, for instance, as a function of that, that we have a joint level, it would be more natural to design our algorithm based on the error defined in the operational space, which means that we look directly to the trajectory of the operational space, and we compute that error. So this is a topic that I would like to address today in this lecture. So let's start by rewriting the proportional derivative with the gravity compensation, ok? As I said, let's change the point of view. Instead of looking at the joint variables, let's look at the directory with the end-effector variables. So don't assume that we have the desired configuration, that we want to reach. But let's assume directly that I have a desired for the end effector. And then compute the error directly in this space. So my error, xp, that actually I have already introduced for us the kind of a guidance. And let's use again that reason. The desired cause of the end effector minus the current cause x is the current cause of the error. I go to use these arrows now to design a proportional derivative algorithm with the gravity compensation. So let's mimic again the same ideas that we have already seen. Let's take a Lyapunov function, also yesterday, We have derived a proportion derivative with the grantee compensation for the visual servoing. Let's use again the same approach today where I'm looking to a different arrow. The arrow is not an emotive tilde, but it's an x tilde. Let's introduce the Diablo function. Diablo function, as usual, would be the sum of two contributions, the kinetic energy, to last 10 which the person in the file is justified the presence of fast interesting does this function have the desired properties is the desire property that this function be is equal to zero if only if I ever reach the desired configuration with 0 velocity. When this function is equal to 0, is actually when q dot is equal to 0 and x tilde is equal to 0, is the only case, which means x tilde equal to 0 that I have reached the desired pose. q tilde equal to 0 means that I have reached the desired pose with its velocity equal to 0. As soon as one of the two is different from zero, v is strictly positive. What do we have to do as next step? Find the derivative. Then exploit the property that Q dot is equal to something from the model. Exploit the important property of the model. I have something where I cast u equal to a property to have the term equal to zero, blah blah. Right? We know how to do that. Of course, in order to guarantee that this is a strictly positive quadratic form, I need to have that the kp as usual is a definite positive. Okay? Let's take the time to remember. You know now how to do that right? It's not anymore a problem. So I'm not going to do all the calculations. It's a bit annoying. We know what I get is a discussion. Okay. Exactly the same calculation. But then you already know how to do it. Of course, here I need to exploit something more in this. is there. Why that? Because when we worked on the joint space, also this term was a function of q dot, if you remember. OK? Now, the situation is different because I have x tilde dot, x tilde. So I need to work a bit about that. OK. Actually, the term that we have here, that's exactly a q dot. And so it was able to plug together these two elements, OK? But I can not do now this thing. So I need to reason a bit in order to have this expression speaking the same language on the other two terms, in order to sum them and to do something. But we have an important expression that can help us, which is the differential kinematic relation that I have between the velocity and the end effector. Just a comment here. I'm expressing the velocity and the end effector with a treatment of Euler records. Remember the notation. Where I use xc dot, of course in the position part, you have the standard linear velocity of the region of the frame attached to the other factor. The second we play by angles is that the time derivative of three play of view levels. So the relation is actually equal to this, the analytical multiply. Okay. Okay, let's use this a relationship possibly to have this term talking in terms of Q dot. Okay? So, from the definition of X tilde, we can get to this elevation. X is constant because we want to reach the final position, okay? So when you take the time derivative here, you have X dot equal to minus X tilde dot, which implies, thanks to this elevation, Look at that x be the dot is equal to minus the analytical or the primal. Is that okay? Okay, let's go ahead. Let's go ahead. And first of all, let's plug this relation into the expression that we got from the dot. The fact that I know that x to the dot is equal to this and ask me to substitute this term exactly with this relation. It will be my V dot in this way. And I like this because here, here Q dot transpose, here Q dot transpose so I can plug these two terms together. We will see the benefits of doing that. Okay. Now we know that we've got standard steps that we need to move. Okay? In particular, one step that we need to move is that PQ dot dot can be repeated using the model in this way. Why do that? Because if you look at the expression of the dot, there is no U written down in a specific way. but the U is the set of variables, where I can decide what to do, right? So I want to add the U inside this expression in an explicit way. I can add these, exploiting the dynamic model, writing that bqq dot dot is equal to this. What you do is to substitute bqq dot dot with this expression. You do a bit of calculation that there is no sense to do it today, okay? Now you know how to do it, okay? At a certain point, you realize that you can exploit this probability to simplify the calculation, right? And doing that finally, we get this assumption. Please do the calculations. It takes two minutes. Okay? Really, two minutes. It's a way to memorize the material. Okay? Take a clock, measure the time, not more than two minutes, I tell you. Okay, do you like this expression? Do you know what to do? How do we design you? in such a way that this value is equal to 0, always the same story, right? Because this value is negative for any q dot. So if we decide to design U, let's forget for a second about this value. If you design U to be equal to g cubed plus j e to the eighth transpose, k p, x tilde, you have that if this value is equal to 0, remaining part of v dot is strictly negative for any q dot. Right? Forget about this. That's the reason about just the case where by the end we have v dot equal to minus q dot transpose f q dot. Perfect. If I apply u in this way, I know that I reach a point where q dot is to 0. So, for sure I reach a point where I stay there. Right. Now we need to verify that the point that I have reached is exactly the desired configuration. Right. Why do we have this derby? Any guess? What did we do when we worked in the joint space. We derived the law this way. We are like an element based on the velocity error in such a way to speed up the transient. This is the derivative contribution. Okay? This is the sense of this term. That indeed, if you add also this term. you compute V dot, what you get is that V dot has this expression. So you make V dot even more negative, which means that adding a derivative contribution, you are speeding up the transit. Are we sure that this is negative or at least negative? Look, they're scratching. Look, they're scratching. Are we sure that this is great parallelism? Are you sure? I'm sure. What about you? Because this is a vector. So if you call this V, this is V transpose, here you have V transpose KDV, as soon as KD is a definite positive matrix we know that this is a greater or equal to 0. Pay attention that even though Q dot, suppose that Q dot is different from 0, you are not completely sure that this evaluation is for sure greater than 0. It depends on the rank of the analytical support. Because suppose that this is singular. if Q dot belongs to the kernel of the analytical Jacobian, you might have Q dot different from 0, but belong into the kernel, so this is equal to 0. But at most it is equal to 0, I'm not creating any damages to the site of my Q dot. Is that okay? Good, okay. this is an angle control law, this is the block diagram, a few reason why I need it, if I realize that it works like this. Notice that in this case, what I'm doing is to measure the error in the operational space, x is. Okay? We already discussed this, just, just a comment. Previously we had to verify that x tilde dot is equal to minus jq q dot. Also, in this factor, observing this factor allows me to rewrite this component directly in terms of the velocity error measure in the operational space. It is just a rewriting of the code. It depends if for you, it is easier to measure the velocity of the joint variables or to measure the velocity in the operational space. Which one is better determines which one of the two forms you can play with. OK. OK. Let's verify. let's verify that I reach exactly the desired point because the fact that B dot has this structure allows me to conclude that I reach a point of Q dot is equal to 0 and I'm happy about that. I'm really, really happy. But, I need to verify that x converges exactly to xB. Okay? So this is the question. Let's use an argument similar to the one we have adopted when we worked in a joint space. So let me replace U with load that I have just designed. Since I have reached a point where I start there, I know that Q dot is equal 0. Q dot dot is equal 0, I can simplify really a lot of the- right? This is equal to 0, this is equal to 0, this is equal to 0, this is equal to 0, this is equal to 0, this cancel with this, so by the end I am left with this expression. So, what can we conclude? What can we conclude? The error is 0. Hm, are you sure? Provided that this is full rank. Yes. If JA cancels this full rank, yes, I agree with you. The problem is that if kp x tilde belongs to the kernel of this, which means that you are in a single configuration. and unfortunately you are in a situation where it belongs to the current money up and you have reached a configuration which is not the desired one but it is properly satisfied okay so we need to pay the attention what for sure we can deduce safely is that if we don't need the singular points along the trajectory depicted by the robotic arm for sure we reach a point where the records are reproduced Is that ok? What about the second family of algorithms that we have designed? Which is a family of algorithms where instead of reaching a final point, we want to track an entire trajectory. And in particularly what I'm referring to is the family of algorithms which are designed according to the feedback linearization strategies. At that time, just to keep compact, to keep compact the description of the model, we write bq, q dot dot plus nq, q dot equal to u where inside n for you the centrifugal effects and we have the friction effect we have the gravitational effect and so on, okay? The feedback linearization strategy, just to review it, is composed by two steps. The first step, you design u as a function of an auxiliary input that here is called y, in such a way that by the end you linearize the dynamics of Q with respect to Y. And in particular, you get a double integrator that in state space is a linear system. Okay? So this one with the same U to equal to BQ, Y plus RQ, Q dot. What we get substituting U with this expression is that the dynamics between the Q dot dot and Y by this derivation is the double integrator. And now we need to design why in such a way that I'm able to stabilize the double integrator. What did we do at this point in the joint space? How did we design why? We implement the standard idea field-forward plus P-D component. Feedforward means Qd dot dot plus Ke Qt dot plus Kp Qt. Feedforward, Qt dot dot plus feedback, which is the proportion of derivative of the equation. Right? Doing that, by the end, what happened was that the dynamics on Qt was ruled by second-order differential equation with the constant gains and as soon as P and P are definitely positive, everything is converging exponentially faster. The problem is that now I'm measuring my errors in the operational space. I don't have the desired trajectory is a joined space. I don't want to work with this. Is the constraint that I put at the beginning of the lecture. I want to work with this quantity and that all the errors are defined with respect to this trajectory define the operation of space. Okay? Let's do what we can. Okay. Let me take the differential relation that I have just used a few minutes ago, that xc dot is equal to the random variables of Q dot. It just to have quantities Referring to acceleration, let me take the derivative of both sides. So xc dot-dot is equal to Jeq-dot-dot plus Je dot q-dot. Okay? Why that? Because I have to define the arrows and the operations. So in the velocity and acceleration here defining the equation. It's just a comment. Also in this case, the first step that I implemented is this. Okay, so we also in this case, we implement this part to linearize the dynamics. And here instead of using the feed-forward plus proportional derivative control based on quantities defined on the joint space, I design an alternative control defined with respect to the quantities in the operational space. So I have Q dot dot equal to Y and this elevation that I have just derived. How to design y such a way that I am able to stabilize this? I provide you directly the relation, now we verify that if we define y this way, we are able to solve the problem. Any question? Did you follow the path? Last thing is, let's see if, this is exactly, so notice that is a bit more articulate than the respect to what we have seen in the joint space because if you look at this, this is meaning what we have seen in the joint space. Feedforward contribution, the cycle trajectory operation is for us the event in contribution to operational space because I have a student doctor is the velocity of the operation of space plus the proportionality put in the operational space because I have kpx right? But enjoying the space I have just this the of course, because I'm still Why here is a bit more complicated because actually the data in the integrator is between Q dot and Y. So I cannot just use these elements which are defined in the operational space. So the terms that you have here are there just to make consistent these fit forward plus proportional derivative control defined in find the operational space to stabilize this w in the joint space. Okay, is that kind of a translator for quantity to define one world to work with respect to quantity defining another space. Okay? Let's do that. since q dot here is exactly y and I get this from this relation lets replace q dot dot with this expression Okay? We have the solution because J is inverse cancels with this JdA it's the identity So you are left with the sum of all these elements Plus this So now Why is that? Because look x dot dot minus x dot dot is what? x dot dot Okay? And so, this is the second-order differential equation with constant gains that we know is converging exponentially faster to zero as soon as T P and T D are definitely positive. Okay? Okay. Let's read together the comments. A critical analysis of the previous scheme reveals that the design of the operational space controller always requires the computation of manipulator zirconia. We have some zirconia computation for the same controllers working in the joint space? No, absolutely not. As a consequence, controlling a manipulator in the operational space is, in general, more complex than controlling it in the joint space. A fundamental presence of singularities and poor redundancy influences the Jacobian and the induced effects are somewhat difficult to handle with the operational space from graph. For instance, if a singularity occurs for the scheme PD-controller with the graphic compensation, and the error enters the new space of these aromia, we have already made this observation, the manipulator gets stuck at a different configuration from the design one. This problem is even more critical from the field binarisation scheme which would require the computation of the inverse of the analytical zephobia. Is that okay? So actually in deriving this control scheme, notice that what you should do to have the overall scheme here is to take this expression for y a to substitute the into y here. The previous expression is the overall scheme that you are. Okay? Because I remember that what you want to design is you. But look, we need to compute the inverse of the analytical zirconia. It could happen that it is not even well defined computing the inverse of analytical zirconia if it is not square. Okay, so actually I cheat a bit when I derive this law because I made an assumption without telling you that the iron becomes a copy and it's a square. It's a diagonal and it is a singular configuration, so. Okay? It's a bit more difficult to work in the operational space. and indeed what I want to do What time is it? You want to make the break now? Yes or no? No. Yes. Yes or no? No? Oh yes. Who is in favor? I know that Luis, Damien, no? You want to see another solution, right? No, who is in favor to make now the break? One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven. Who wants to go ahead? For the ones who want to go ahead, you want to skip the break? I'm going to give you some time, but try to do it. One piece is longer than the other. The longer is break or not? Yes. Yes, the longer is break. There isn't any agreement about that. Break. Yes, sir. 10 minutes, okay? You're not a model. You're just a good-looking guy. You got a nice voice. You're handsome. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. You're a good-looking guy. Okay, let's start. If we're using the model written in the standard way, and designing U based on the quantities defined in the operational space makes our life a little more complex, let's change the way we look at the model. is to rewrite the model where instead of having the joint variables there, let me rewrite the model assuming that I have the operational space vector, which actually is a fictitious model. But allows me to do something that in my modest opinion is extremely interesting. Okay? So what do we want to do is to derive the dynamical model which describes the relationship between the generalized forces acting on the manipulator and the number of minimum variables chosen to describe the end-effect proposition and the operational orientation, sorry, in the operational space. Okay. So this is the model that after some effort we have derived, you. We suffer a bit, but by the end we will reconsider it. And actually it's the model that you have after some calculation to the right of the norm of y. I'm going to change the point of view, OK? And basically to try to rewrite it well here I something, tissues quantity, which are the first just to the variables that might be directly in your initial response. And also for the elements that. Remember, remember that the tau are the joint tones that you apply to the joints in order to actuate the output. Right? Look here. What is HE? HE is a vector where we collect together the forces which are applied where? At the end effector. Not only the forces, but we have forces and torques that we apply at the end effector. What is J transpose HE? I am translating the forces and torques that I applied to the end effector into the corresponding torques that I have to apply at the joint level in order to compensate for these forces and torques. In some sense, if I don't want to look at forces and torques applied to the end effector, but I want to see the same contribution of the joint level. What I do is to compute the z transpose H, and I'm looking to the same forces and torques but from the joint point of view. OK? We have seen this relation. Indeed, this term here comes with a negative term because it's a part of the torques that they apply the joint level that they need to compensate for the effects that I have on the joint other than the fact of due to the presence of force of those which act directly there. I told you this because of what I can assume to do. Let's take the torques down and apply them directly. Directly to the joint. Instead of looking to these torques at the joint level, you do to them, okay? So let me introduce a gamma e. Gamma e are the equivalent forces, torques, that I have to apply to the end effector in order to see at the joint level exactly the torques done. Okay, these are fixed issues, torques and force at end effector level, okay? But it's a way to look to the talks that I apply the right the joint level from a different point of view, which is the operational space. Okay? Of course, I gave them the relation between the two bodies given by the transpose of the geometric as usual. I can stress it again that the gamma yarn not two forces and forces are the issues, forces that allows me to describe in an equivalent way the torque applied by the joint level but seen from the operational space. Is that ok? So this is the first starting point. Okay. Since the matter we are going to elaborate. It's a bit annoying, just a bit. Not to show you so. Let's neglect the presence of the frictions, okay? Let's discard that. And what I do from my dynamical model, let me derive the expression for the acceleration of the joint dynamic. Okay. And when I derive this expression, which actually is not difficult but because what we need to do is to take this term, this term, this term. To take them on the other side with the different sign, what I have to do is to multiply by the inverse of the inertia matrix. Okay? Which is exactly what you read here. But what I have done is to Substitute tau with this equivalent expression. So this is the reason why here what you read is B inverse J transpose gamma E minus h. Is that OK? Good. Let's take this expression that we derived a few slides ago in the first part of the lecture. I derived this starting from the differential relation. okay? What I do is to replace this q dot dot with this expression. Okay? with this expression. Okay? Actually, before doing that, we need to discuss a point. This is the next step. But before doing that, let me do that. Since I want to replace q dot here with this expression, here I have the numerical jacobian. Here I have the geometric jacobian. This is not satisfactory from my point of view. I want to have an homogeneous description. Okay. Since I'm working in the operational space, I prefer to add an analytical Jacobian. Okay. And we know that there is a stronger relation between the two Jacobians we derived together in this class, right? And you should remember that there exists a matrix dA that allows me to write the relation between the two Jacobians as the geometric Jacobian J equal to the matrix dA multiplied by J e. Right? There is a set of slides explaining exactly this part. Right? So I can use this relation. Let's take, for instance, J transpose gamma e. In place of J transposes, you can write a j A transpose d A transpose from this relation, so I can write that j transpose gamma E is equal to j A transpose d A transpose gamma E. It's a way to have just one Jacobian into our relation just for convenience, notational convenience, let's call d A transpose gamma E as gamma A. Okay? This is just to simplify the notation and The same reasoning can be done for He. Okay. There you have J transpose He. You can write J transpose He equal to Ja transpose Da transpose He. So if you call Da transpose He equal to He, we can simplify the notation that we have in this buffer. Okay? Everything just to say that the going ahead in this life in place of g minus h, we will have GA transpose gamma a minus h, just to have the analytical Jacobian into our expression. Okay? Yes. Gamma a, maybe again, to be too fast in the previous slide. So in place of J, you can write a T a J a, but since this is transposed, here you can write that this expression is J a transpose T a transpose gamma e. I call gamma a this term, so basically what you have is that J transpose gamma e is equal to J a transpose gamma a. okay? The similar relation holds for j transpose H. So just to say that these are the two relations that I consider. Is that okay? Perfect. Let's substitute. Let's do some calculations. And what you get is a solution. Okay, what is my goal? My goal is to rewrite a model mimicking this structure. But where here I have xE dot dot, here I have xE dot, let's forget the features. We are assuming that we don't have them. and the gravitational effects some sense. And here I would like to have a just contribution. In the operational space. Let's start this altogether. So what I'm going to say is that by the end what I would like to reach is a kind of model, like this. Notice that they have the same structure where in place of having the joint variables, I have the operational space values. Okay? Let me stress since now the fact that this isn't just the fit issues. Model is not representing the true inertia matrix. A true Coriolis centrifugal matrix, the gravitational effects. Okay. But under proper definition of this matrix, if you run this model, of course, the behavior of this model provides exactly the true behavior of the end effect of that. But let's see how we can get from this expression to a model written like this. First of all, look here. What you want to have is a matrix in front of x, dot, dot, right? Of course. Here now this, that I have directly forces and torques. Okay? So look at the matrix that you have in front of gamma a minus h a here. OK? If you take the inverse of this matrix, OK? And you multiply both sides by the inverse of this matrix, you have something in front of x c dot dot that could play the role of the fixed-issues inertia matrix seen from the original experience. OK. And so if you do that, the other advantage is that on the right-hand side, you have exactly gamma a minus h a. This is exactly what we do. Let's define b a to be equal, exactly, to j a b inverse, j a transpose, b inverse. And if you multiply both sides by exactly this matrix, what you have is that here you have a xc dot dot. We discuss later this terms, OK? And the element that you have here is that BA by this matrix provides me exactly the debt. So we have a function, gamma a. minus h, okay? Of course, we have several other terms which are multiplied by the dA matrix. And we need to cast all these terms in a proper way inside this contribution and this contribution. Is that okay? Okay. What is the gravitational contribution that we have here? The gravity term enters into this term. Now we have to multiply this term by the BA matrix. Tissues, Cartesian inertia. So if we call GA equal to BA, GA, B inverse GA, I can assume that this term is in some sense the gravity contribution seen from the operation space. And so we don't have anymore this term. What is left here is this term this term multiplied by the BA matrix Right? These are still the terms that I need to play with Okay? So forget this for a second So far we have this is the grammatical term that is a chain minus a chain. What I am still playing with is a BA multiplied by this term plus BA multiplied by this term. Of course, this brings this terms on the other side of the equality, I have to change the sign. Okay? The last term that I need to define is this. and the only option is that CA by XC dot is given by this formula. This is the definition that I provide. Actually, it's possible to prove that there is exactly a matrix CA such that the disemployed is well defined. I'm not going to enter all these details. What I'm telling you, the system matrix C8 such that this definition is well-formed. Ok? And this allows me, under this definition of fifty issues, operational space in a natural matrix. Fifty issues, gravitational, contribution seen from the operational space. Fifty issues, Cartesian, coriolis, and centripetal effects seen from their operational space to rewrite and equivalent model which works in their operational space. Some sense is a change point of view. Let's me look to my dynamical model from the operational space. And I want to rewrite it just looking at my model from this point of view. The equivalent way to rewrite all the things is given by this model. Is that okay? There is a bit of definition to be made, but what is nice is what is coming down. That what I do is a two-bit write, the feedback minimization I want to do, working with this space. Okay? It doesn't take a lot of time. Ok? Yes, this is just a comment. Okay? Under the assumption that you have a robot, which is non redundant, this expression can simplify a bit. Okay? Under the assumption that you have a robot where J is square. This is why you're going to simplify in particular. This is simplified as okay, it's just due to the fact that if J is square invertible, you can revise that generalization. Do you know if you have A multiplied by B multiplied by C, E inverse, suppose that all three matrices are imperative. The inverse of this is a C inverse, B inverse, A inverse. So you can exploit this relation inside here to simplify the relation to get a better understanding of the gravitational contribution. This is just that, okay? Now, our robot is not interacting with the environment. So a cheese is equal to 0, which means that also a chain is equal to 0, okay? If the robot is not interacting with the environment, the initial h vector is equal to 0. And as a consequence, also h is equal to 0. Now, given this model. I need to track a trajectory. Let's do together. Now the task is doable for everyone. If, of course, you have followed the lectures and the material. But the task now is I want to track a trajectory, which is defined in the operational space. So xV dot dot xV dot xV. So it is a trajectory defined in position, velocity and acceleration. I want to track this trajectory. Of course, the variable that I have here is gamma iV. So I have to design gamma i in such a way that the error xV is going to zero. Look at the model. What do you do as a first step? Is a two step strategy is exactly the same that we have already seen. I put gamma A equal to what? To b a by an auxiliary control a, okay, plus c a, x a dot, plus g a. right if you substitute this control here what you get is what f c dot equal to water Replace gamma a with this control. So you are left with that c. Dot dot equal to what? Try to round. 8, 8. Who answered? Good. You see you have to come to lectures. Now, how do we design a? How do we design a? Yeah, I don't have to do what I have done in the previous part of the lectures. Let me design a directly with the feed-forward plus feedback node. So A is equal to x dot dot plus proportional derivative controller. Plus E P x tilde plus K P x tilde dot. Is exactly the law that we have already seen in jump space. Nothing is different. just the quantities with which I am playing. Right. Let's look directly on the slide maybe it's easier for you to follow. Look, this is the feedback linearization step. Alright. If I apply this where Gamma a is a function of a, I'm left with a double integrator x e dot dot is equal to a. How to stabilise it? Let's design a as a feed forward of xd dot plus the proportional derivative contribution. Plus kp x tilde plus kd x tilde dot. Replacing A with these by the end, the dynamics of the error is given by a second order differential equation. OK. where xt is converging exponentially fast to 0 as soon as kp are definite. So I suffered a bit to manipulate the model. And let me stress again, that the model that I have there is just a fictitious model, which provides me an equivalent to description of the previous model but VA is not a true inertia. In some sense is the inertia that I am looking at it from a different point of view with different glasses, okay? But having rewritten the model in this way makes me much more convenient to design the controller. I follow exactly the same steps that we have used when we work in the geographical level. Okay. Remember that now I design gamma a. But in reality, I have to go back to the true quantities, okay? and remember that Tau is equal to Gamma A transpose to sorry, GA transpose Gamma A so what you have to do is to replace this expression of Gamma A in this expression of Gamma A, I just substitute A with this relation if you substitute Gamma A here with this relation you have the two talks that you apply to your system okay In case the robot is not redundant, we have this simplified formulation, you can simplify a bit the relation that you have here. Okay. We can skip this consideration. Is that okay? Any questions? Let's try to remember this part because it will be useful. Okay. We have still, let's say, 10 minutes. Not more. Okay. Let me introduce the interaction of the robot with the environment. What I am going to present is relatively relaxed. Okay. But let's start with the topic and then we continue, next week of Wednesday. There is no lecture tomorrow. there is no lecture on GD. OK? So next. In what book? We have still four lectures. OK. Perfect. Is there any question? OK. What we have seen is this. The first part of the lectures, I introduced the arrow in the operational space. to the bride of control less compensation we saw that there are some drawbacks I changed the point of view to the side was to be by the model in a different way I wrote a characterization of my model just assuming that I'm looking my model for a space and provide an equivalent description where I introduced equivalent features, inertia matrix, Coriolis matrix, gravitational effects, and so on. And that was easy to design the controller. Actually starting, just a final comment, starting from this model, you can derive also the PD a gravity controller with the gravity compensation if you want, reasoning exactly as we have done but keep in mind that now you have to provide an alternative definition of what? Of the kinetic energy. You have to introduce a fictitious kinetic energy that would be 1F XC dot transpose BA XC dot. And then you have a quadratic term, which is a function of s tilde. But if you want to introduce a Lyapunov function to derive the proportional derivative controller with the gravity compensation starting from this model, you have to provide the suitable kinetic energy definition. Is that okay? Okay. Since there are no questions, let's start quickly with these set of slides. Okay. We know that I have a open mind to interact with the environment. This is our last topic. There could be two possible strategies to control the effect of when we have interaction with the environment. One family of control is called passive. One family is called active. We spend a lot of time in the so-called active strategies. But what I want to tell you now, a few minutes, is how the passive strategies, which actually implemented in practice work, okay? These strategies based on the introduction of these remote separate compliance devices. And what we will do in the remaining part of the class will be to introduce this thing. Okay, the RCC device work in this way. you have at the end of your manipulator, at the end of the effector, a system so you have two metallic parts, here, plates, which are connected by these elastic ends which allows to the two plates both to slide and also to rotate OK. We see, now, why we have this flexible head. Let me explain through a simple example. Here you have your hand effector, your arm. The hand effector is here, you have this system, and here you have the final tool, That in this case is a simple... A simple gripper who's goal is to take this object so it's bringing the object and he has to insert this object inside this hole. OK? It's clear what we need to do. It's a pegging hole task. You have to take this object and insert the object inside the hole that you have here. Ok. In the ideal situation, what you can do is to design the exact trajectory to be followed by the header factor, Such that the effector arises directly in the proper configuration. But of course, this assumes that you have perfect knowledge of everything. Of the position of the final wall and so on. It's impossible. So this daily area, is elastic element. Remote center compliance point that allows me to solve the problem. Suppose that you arrive here with a small misalignment, okay? So you arrive here, you touch this point. This point exact the force, right? And the force which is exact here allows me to do a movement which is asset by the elastic element which allows me to adapt to the situation to enter inside the hole okay so when you touch here you receive a force okay the element receives a force and notice that the element is able to adapt the movement of the grip in such a way that by the end you are exactly inside the loop. Ok. Suppose you don't have this flexible system, you have a rigid manipulator. Suppose that you arrive here with this misaligned and you touch the element there, you stay there. Okay? Because the manipulator is still trying to follow a trajectory which actually does not allow you to enter perfectly. Okay? But the presence of this flexible element is such that the system is adapting to the forces that it is receiving in such a way to take a direction that allows this element to enter directly in there. Of course you can use a system like this just in some specific task, it is still used because it is working properly okay. And it allows you to make your strategy robust with respect to adjust to whose goal is aligned okay. So actually for several classical tasks it is working perfectly. But, of course, if you consider many other tasks where you must be really precise, this is not working properly. Actually, we would like to have a robot doing different tasks, like opening the door. Right? Like taking these items, transporting some other situation, and in this situation, we need to elaborate more complex components. Okay? But this passive control is still used in the profession. Okay, here I have just some example where active control is needed. Okay? Control following, in this case, you have to assemble the task, here is the situation, Let's say that in this case, it's important for several tasks to have also a force sensor, and we will develop a class of controllers where we assume to have this sensor, which are able to measure the interaction, the force interaction that we do have in the environment, a particular sensor that are able to measure both linear forces and also torques. okay, but I guess that is enough for today, let's meet the next Wednesday, okay?