 The following audio is from quote from the official version of the student's speech. Please continue with all arms. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. All right. I want to go with you. Q. How many times have you been to the same place? A. At least 20 times in my opinion. Q. What's the difference between the two places? A. The two places are quite close to each other. I was going to the same place and then I saw a bike and then I saw a car and they were 7 km away. Q. The one on the right is the one on the left? Yes, I can do this. You can do this. I can do this. I can do this. I can do this. I can do this. I can do this. I can do this. I can do this. I can do this. I can do this. I can do this. I can do this. Thank you. um um i the is but probably they think it's good. They think it's good, so... a this the the um I don't know why I'm going to say that, but it's a little bit of a shame, really. I'm sorry, but it's a little bit of an issue. It's a little bit of a shame, really. I'm not saying that for the sake of the show, but I'm just saying that it's a little bit of an issue. Thank you. I Well You never know. You never did anything with Big Data? No, with Big Data. I had a long period of time with Big Data. Ah, you had a long period of time with Big Data. I didn't know what to do with this data. I didn't know what to do with this data. At least, you know how to do it. At least, you know how to do it. But, I don't think you should do this. I don't know. The It is very important to be aware of the new changes of this area and to avoid the loss of the past. This is the reason why I have called it the Because Giovanni was a good player and I was a good player too. I was a good player, but I was more of a strategy and I had to improve for the team. You were a good player, but I think you have to improve too. So I stay here all day. Even if it's really cold. Or we're going to the hotel. We are not going there today. The class is over. Thank you very much! Nice to meet you! Good luck! Thank you! It's hot here. Oh yes! You have a good day! Don't study at home! I would say 14 years in the universe. But the beginning was okay. Well, at least the beginning. Do you want to fight with us? No, I want to fight with you. I got you in the back. I got you in the back. Oh, okay. I'll hold you in the back. I got you in the back. Ah, we have a different beginning. Ah, okay, sometimes it's the other way around. You're going to have to fight with me. Not a chance. I'm already scared, I have never been here without the gym. We have seen the We are going to the I can't see the comments, it's a bit weird It's not happening Is this a script? Yes They said it's like a cabal and I'm not sure You can see it You can see it? I want to take the bus in the middle of the street I have a bus in the middle of the street I want to take the bus in the middle of the street I have a bus in the middle of the street I want to take the bus in the middle of the street I have a bus in the middle of the street I have a bus in the middle of the street I want to take the bus in the middle of the street I have a bus in the middle of the street I have a bus in the middle of the street I want to take the bus in the middle of the street I want to take the bus in the middle of the street I want to take the bus in the middle of the street I want to take the bus in the middle of the street How do you feel now? Maybe because I haven't talked to Forcible. It's always been like this. It's not possible to do that. Forcible. Because for you, it's easy. You like Forcible, but you can't beat Forcible. No, impossible. You can't beat Forcible. I'm unbeatable. I will help you to beat Forcible. Yes, I've seen it, it's very good, it looks like a real book. Yes, it's the same. It's good that you can read the text. The text is amazing. It's a different type of text. You can see the text in your head. I'm not sure about reading. I'm not sure about reading. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I'm the director of the I'm the director of the I'm the director of the I'm the director of the I'm the director of the I'm the director of the This is one of the few Yes. good morning let's start sorry for the delay but I was stuck in the traffic it was an accident highway last week right? that time Okay third homework. Third homework finally, I'm a bit late, so instead of one point, points, two points okay due to my delay so let's go we will do the homework and then we will step into the last part so basically we are going to realize the dynamic model of this arm there is a first question, pay attention to the definition given in the figure of the variable to Q2 and pay attention to the fact if it is compatible with the rules or rule of thumb so that we have seen in the class with respect to the Denardian-Bernard Procedure, ok? If you think that with respect to what we have seen in the class there is a better way, more consistent way to define q2 what I ask you is to provide that definition you can derive the model either using this definition of q2 or the one that you provide okay but please discuss this point then I ask you to derive the model to derive proportional derivative plus constant and gravity compensation ok, this law is not used for the final sum the one constant means that you are compensating for the gravity just the final point that you want to reach remember that we discuss this. You have all these loads discussed in the slides. It's not the view for the final exam, but you have to resort to it to discuss this point. A question. Here I define two angles. Actually, zero is a length because the first joint is prismatic. This is an angle. of pi here refers to the q2 of the figure the value of q2 refers to the definition of q2 given in one of course if you decide because it is very comfortable for you to use the definition of q2 that you provide this is not anymore pi, but you have maybe just a 200 constant is that ok? But this pile refers to the figure one, okay. And then I ask you to discuss some points, you can find the way to discuss them in the slides, and then the linear parameterization of the dynamic model. ok, you have to verify if with respect to this dynamic parameter spectrum it is true that we have a linear parametricization ok, which means that if you can write the model as a regressor y, multiplied by y This is the point when I ask you to design adaptive controller means to introduce the new reference velocity which is the un-made velocity and then the regressor depends is an angry definition depends on the desired velocity, reference velocity pay attention to these terms of the substitutor. This is an extremely interesting part that I would say maybe 5 percent of the students so far have been able to discuss correctly. I'm pretty sure that this is the right era to increase significantly these types of data. I don't know how yet this is going to be. Let's discuss in June what is the result. But I'm pretty sure you will improve this statistic. I asked her to do it, she's not improving. Because. Because. Ok? Two points. Ok. There are many things that I have to do. First of all, to conclude theoretical content to add all the pdf notes to add pastes and also right and we try to do properly my job this week okay sorry i'm a bit late i guess too many things yeah Oh that line, good point. June 15, June 20, there is one homework coming and the deadline will be June 25 for that. Not later because then we have the exam and not for the exam. They are optional. We are lucky that Italy is not playing soccer at home. But there are students, of course, supporting other teams like you, right? No. No? Right. Because your country is? Lebanon. Lebanon is not. Morocco, my friend. Morocco? Yes, my friend from.. Morocco is a strong team. It's not in the class. It's not in this class? Norway, Norway was, the reason why Italy is out. But Friday there is another match. Italy against Norway. Now you have to make the oral exam for them because they have to go back to Norway, for job, right? Okay. Okay. That's great. That's great. Oh, okay. okay what are the plans for the last three lectures first of all I hope you enjoyed the last lecture given by Roberto Polizel keep in mind that if you are interested he is always offering masterpieces okay so he had a long score within his model. For sure more than 20 thesis project and all the students were really happy because usually there is someone working there taking care really carefully of the Master Thesis project so there are really good people here. Okay what are the plans? Today we like to cast the interaction of the robot with the environment in a quite theoretical framework to show you how we can rewrite the dynamic of a robot when there are constraints that force the motion of the robot to stay within a particular configuration. Tomorrow, and on Thursday, we will see real techniques which actually are applying this. Okay. So today, we call theoretical framework which actually is a quite useful if we want to simulate the robots working and interacting with the environment and tomorrow and Thursday we will see the implication. We see the impedance controller, argument controller which actually are applied in practice. Okay. So let me start off from this extremely simple example. First class in physics, not more, maybe first class, first week of the first class in physics but actually it is high school here. We have a really stiff environment here. Okay, it's a wall, you have this mass which is pushed by this force Fx in a horizontal direction and by a force Fy in a vertical direction. ok so what are the equations of the motion? We know there is a Newton law that said mass by acceleration is equal to the sum of the forces applied OK, let's suppose that the molar here is located at the coordinate X equal to c. When the coordinate X is strictly smaller than c, of course, we don't have the reaction force of the molar applied to the mass. but when the mass research this point, the world is producing the reaction force, which is equal to minus Fx. So let's call the reaction force to be Fp. In case the force of the environment of the mass, when x is simply smaller than c, we have that Fp is equal to zero. When x is equal to c, of course, what's going to happen is that the velocity along the x direction is equal to 0 the same is true for the acceleration ok, we have this force at the mass and it stays stuck there and in this case in order to have this property we have to have this property of course according to the action-action principle we have that F e is equal to minus F x ok, why don't we have a good piece of situation of course everything is true because we are assuming that the environment and the robot are both infinitely stiff ok which means infinitely rigid there are no deformations of the material ok so in an extremely ideal case it is important to do a good exercise in high school because it depends on precisely and the equation of course there are also more complex situations if we want to describe this as an example just look at the basic physics we can derive all the equations ok, and we know that of course when the mass reaches here if you apply the vertical force the motion that you can have is sliding along the wall. And it's a constrained motion, it's a motion which is constrained to stay there, attached to the wall, just to move in the vertical direction. But there are situations which are a bit more complicated than this. Where the motion is still constrained. Let's assume that it is where you have a robot, and then the factor is moving on this circle how can we describe the motion here? it is difficult just looking at the basics formulas coming from business here we need to articulate a bit more the math to derive a possible way to describe the motion also in this situation the goal is exactly this to introduce let's say in a standard Lagrangian theory extended with respect to the one we have seen so far which is able to capture exactly the notion how well the effect of circular sticks is that ok? this is the goal for today Okay, let's start introducing the important quantities produced today. Our model, as usually inside the CQ Q dot, we have the C matrix multiplied by Q dot. Okay, it's just a short time notation to keep our model more compact. Okay, so we have the Coriolis centrifugal effect and so on. r equal to f is the task output function which is described then by the proposer and what we assume is that the task variables which are r, are constrained are subject to a number of geometric constraints constraints which are equal to capital M, which are of course strictly smaller than n. You can rewrite them as kr equal to 0. These are the constraints that can be written in a circle, as we have seen in the previous case, where in this case the only variable that you constrain is the position of that vector. Because you pay attention just the position of the factor in that case. So R is just a two-dimensional vector describing the x and y position of the vector. And in general, what we can do, in place of R, you can put FQ, which is exactly the description of the task that we want to perform. Let's define in general this H-function, which is a function of the generalized coordinates, which describes the constraints to which the vector is subject to. ok so hq equal to zero is the general expression that the test mean what is the constraint that the vector has to satisfy ok ok let's do that I told you what we do is to introduce a new method in a gradual with respect to the one that we have already introduced Okay, we don't have the time to justify why we do that, but it's extremely elegant what we are doing because it allows us to derive the constrained dynamics following the same steps that we have already seen so far. the strategy we pursue to derive the dynamic model of the robot was let's introduce the Lagrangian function and then let's take a set of derivates Let's mimic this approach but we need to incorporate into the Lagrangian function the fact that the dynamics must be constrained For instance, keep in mind the fact that the end effector has to move where? On a circle. Okay? So we have this function H q equal to 0, which incorporates the presence of the constraint. So what we do is to introduce this event, the Lagrangian, which is equal to the sum of the Lagrangian that we have already introduced, which is given by the difference between the kinetic energy, the potential energy, and we have this area lambda transpose h cube, what is the dimension of h? Remember we have capital M constraints, ok this is a scalar product because remember that the Lagrangian function is a scalar function ok, it's a scalar function, so here we have a scalar product between lambda and age which means that also lambda is anti-national ok lambda is called the vector of the Lagrange multipliers maybe you are already familiar with these terms if you took some optimization class where you have seen a Lagrange interface I believe like the dual assembly I don't know if this is material or some class, but when you introduce the dual function, suppose that you have an optimization problem which is formulated with the presence of constraints. One interesting fact is not to work with the problem problem but to work in the dual problem. The dual problem is exactly obtained introducing the Lagrangian function which is the function of cost plus the scalar product between the Lagrangian multiplier and the constraints. Okay? We will see that Lambda in our case is not only a mathematical vector that I introduce to include the constraints in the Lagrangian function, but it has a physical, important physical meaning. we will understand that the line can be represented by set of generalised forces that arise as a compact when the robot tries to violate the constraints doing outward derivation we will appreciate this function So, it's important to stress a fact that the momentum of Lagrangian is not only a function of qq. But now it's a function of the third gradient, which is the vector of Lagrangian multipliers. And what we do now is to derive the equations of motion, considering the same derivatives that we have seen, when we derive the dynamic model of the robot but considering the momentum of Lagrangian and including into our analysis also the lambda vector ok so these are the derivations that we take remember this formula is exactly the one that we have used equal to u Okay, so here we have all the good contributions of all the low cost of the forces. Right? So it is not difficult to see that if you think the partial derivative I go quite fast, okay, this part, this is just a matter of math. This theoretical part is not the content of the exam, otherwise I kill you. but this is extremely elegant. In my opinion, this is one of the most beautiful parts of this. If you take the derivative of La with respect to q-dot, look, you are just deriving this because q-dot is not here. Okay, so you have this angry. The same is true here, but when you derive this with respect to q, Pay attention, why? Because Q is also here. So you don't have only the derivative of this with respect to Q, but you have to consider also this additional term, which justifies the fact that you have this additional term. Is that okay? This comes here because you are taking the derivative with respect to Q of lambda transpose HQ. Now we have another element. So we need to take these derivatives also with respect to lambda. Here you should have the time derivative of the partial derivative of A with respect to the partial derivative of lambda dot. But we don't have lambda dot. So this is equal to 0. so we are left just with the derivation of La with respect to lambda This is extremely simple, look at the expression lambda enters the augmented Lagrangian in a linear way so when you take the partial derivative of this element with respect to lambda this is equal just to hq right? So, you have to write partial derivative of La in respect to lambda equal to hq, y equal to 0. Remember that what we put here is the contribution of the non-conservative force, which is related to lambda. Previously, I told you that by the end, we will see that lambda expresses the reaction force of the constraint when the robot wants to violate the constraint. Suppose consider the case. The case, you have your constraint here, the circle. You have your robot that is constrained to stay here. Suppose that the robot force, force the violation. Okay? the force you can decompose this into two components. The tangent one we are fine with it because it is the one that keeps you on the constraint. The orthogonal one is compensated by the reaction force, right? but this is perpendicular to the constraint to the tangent of the constraint the job that you that this force is providing is the scalar product between the component of the force and the elementary displacement right? but since the elementary displacement here is tangent to the constraint what you have is that the job which is produced by this force is equal to 0 this is the product between two components and so we can summarize saying that here we have zero because the contact forces which are the one associated to lambda does not produce work because it's just a reaction force which is perpendicular to the motion so this is not work So there's an analysis process that we need to do the . Is that OK? So everything is inside of this two equations. The motion is inside this equation. Also what we do now is to manipulate a bit then in order to make this a bit more clear, right? Is what you were thinking. I don't understand nothing here. I want to do something that means that in a more understandable expression. Let's do that. So, let me jump over some details. I know that you believe that the calculations are correct. But look, what do you have here? What do you recognize here? The old model, right? Is exactly the equations of the old model. This justifies the presence of this term. Okay, we have exactly the model, equal to u plus this term, where we have denoted by a cube So it's a partial derivative of H with respect to Q. Look at that when here you take the derivative of this element with respect to Q, you have the derivative of H with respect to Q multiplied by lambda. Okay? So let's call A, it's partial derivative with respect to Q. Let's assign it, let's say Jacobian. is the additional element that we have but notice that what we obtain here which is actually the because it is a differential equation it's a second order differential equation of course must be constrained to what we have here which is the initial constraint that we have Is that OK? OK, yes, we are a bit satisfied, but not completely, we'd like to have just one equation, getting rid of the presence of the constraint. Of course, let's make a standard assumption that the metric series is full rank, otherwise this situation. Already under this assumption we need to do a lot of calculations and it is not correct as a drama. So let's consider the case where just A is not correct. No please sir. What is the demand chart on there? Anah Anah Anah Anah Anah Anah h is the scalar function which is defined with m components, right? so h has m components each row of the E matrix is one component of h where you take the partial derivative of this component with respect to q1 up to qn so it is a matrix with m rows and columns okay? so since M is strictly smaller than N what we have is that the rank for rank means that the rank is capital M okay, good what I want to do is eliminate this guy, lambda by the end I want to have just one differential equation speaking about the generalized coordinates which is the equation describing the motion, the constrained motion. And what we have is the rid of the data. How do we do that? Let's take hq equal to zero, and let's take the time derivative of h. Now we are confident in this calculation. You apply the chain rule. You take the partial derivative of h with respect to q, multiply the derivative of q with respect to the time. So we have AQQ dot equal to zero and take another time the time derivative so you have AQQ dot dot plus A dot Q dot equal to zero. And what we do now is to derive q dot from this expression, okay? You can isolate q dot dot from this expression, okay? You bring everything on the right hand side and you can bring what we find by the inverse, okay? For q dot equal to psi, you derive q dot dot from this expression. You substitute exactly in. Okay, you obtain this relation. This is the C component of the Coriolis integral of f. g is the gravity in terms. Remember that now, in this dynamical model, we have the presence of A transpose lambda and we need to keep it because of course. Why this is interesting? Because it is a linear equation in lambda, right? Because here you have A inverse A transpose lambda equal to something else you can derive lambda just by pre-multiply by the inverse of these vectors ok? let's discuss just this fact with some more details so notice that we have A mp inverse A transpose lambda we can write to minus A dot Q dot minus A B inverse U plus A B inverse C plus A B inverse G right. If this matrix is invertible we can derive lambda with respect to the rest. And We should know that this matrix is invertible. There is an assumption that we made that guarantees that A, B, A transpose is inverse. The fact that A is a full rank matrix. We know that B is the inertial, is invertible, because look what is the dimension of AB inverse A transpose. A is a matrix m by n, right? B is a matrix m by n, good. And A transpose is a matrix which is n by n. So by the end, A being C transpose is a matrix which is n by n as expected because I remember that lambda is m dimensional vector. so if we do this step we compute, this expression ok which provides us the value of lambda, remember that lambda are the forces, the reaction forces which are rejected by the constraints when the robot tries to violate the constraints it's the physical meaning of this quantity ok, look here we have this matrix inverse multiplied by A B inverse and we call this entire matrix this inverse A B inverse as this inertia weighted pseudo inverse of the constraint Georgian wave so we call A B pseudo inverse here is the in order to do the transpose it is exactly this matrix ok so we have that lambda has this expression look at the expression of lambda that we have here it is a function of only Q with Q dot it is only a function of Q Q dot and of course it is a function of this additional matrix A which is the Jacobian of the constraints, but what we can do now is to go back to this expression to substitute in place of larger the expression that we have just derived and by doing that what you have is a differential equation which is a function of only q dot and in the presence of the Jacobian of the constraints but let's do this calculation if you do that, what you get by the end is this the natural form so we have the inertial term what do you have of the volcanic side? notice that here you have this term u-c-g where you have the two forces applying to the system here you have the coniolistic integral effects that we know are fictitious components of forces applied to the system and we have the gravity forces but all these terms which incorporates the real fictitious forces are modulated by this matrix which takes into account the fact that the motion is constrained at least so I can say it is a kind of filter which is considering only the forces that provide the motion which is compatible with the constraints. Is that OK? Plus we have an additional term which arises actually due to the fact that we have the first step. We have derived also the expression of Langa. So we have that this quite articulated matrix, again this is a projection matrix which makes the original motion compatible with the constraints of the system. In addition, we have also this term, but the equations that we derive provide us also work, the expression of which are the reaction forces which are applied by the system. Why we like this? For two reasons. First of all is an elegant derivation, an elegant mathematical derivation. As I said that I don't have the time to justify why through the But appreciate this. If you are able to write the constraints in explicit form to this h cubed function, you have the motion which is described by this equation, where the reaction forces which are given by this expression, and you can simulate your constraint system. ok you have just the equation that allows you to simulate exactly the motion of that vector which is constrained to stay on the circle ok in particular what is true is that if the initial robot state q0 q.0 satisfy the constraints which means that hq0 must be equal to 0 but also that a q0 q dot 0 is equal to zero this means that the initial constraints are satisfied if you simulate the dynamics of the robot according to this equation implementing some forces u that you are applied to the joints of the robot the dynamics that you get here is consistent with the constraint. So let's take again, the example where then the factor is constrained to move on a circle. You describe H as a circle of course we know this is the geometric description of the root locus which is a circle. You have your expression for H. You decide the profile of the forces the torques which are applied to the two revolute joints what you get simulating is a difference solving this differential equation is exactly the motion that that effect is performing over the circle but you are sure that solving this what you get is exactly the motion over this circle because it's the constraints where the and the robot must be ok so it's a powerful way to run simulations in order to see what's going on applying particular profiles of torques over our system let's go back to this example and then we make the break okay of course what I can do is to discuss this example through the formalism that I have just introduced right I know I know here life is easy we can solve this example thanks to high school physics but let's see what are the results if I apply the formalism that I have just introduced ok, here we have a mechanical system not alpha, not beta, right? subject to forces so what I can do is to implement what we have just seen notice that in the dynamics in free motion in this case, what are the generalized coordinates in this case? are the x and the y coordinates of course and what is the inertia matrix? inertia matrix for this simple example is the block diagonal matrix 2 by 2 with the mass in the diagram. Right? So, this is the model. The numerical model of my system is a simplified system with respect to the whole general system that we have seen when we have gravity, when we have other things. Okay. What is the constraint here? The constraint is the volume is the only one. Of course, what I want to describe now is just the dynamics not in free motion but when the mass is constrained to slide over the constraint ok the formalism that I have introduced is useful when we have the constraint so let's suppose that the mass is here and is constrained to move here along the vertical the y direction ok so the constraint is quite easy to be written is X minus C equal to zero. Since it is easy it is not difficult also to derive, there is a copy of the constraint that since I have just one constraint, the dimension of the A matrix which is the partial derivative of H with respect to Q is a row vector with the two components. Here you have the partial derivative with respect to X which is one, here you have the partial derivative with respect to y, which is equal to zero. What you can do then, remember that an important role is played by this matrix, which is the weight of the 7 universe, blah blah blah. You do some calculations, and what you get is this matrix. Here the calculations okay so I am deriving all the properties that I need to write these equations then you compute this which is the projection matrix which is this okay what you get is exactly this matrix the dynamic and consistent projection matrix then what you do is to calculate also the expression of lambda u, the forces that we are applying here is fx, fy ok, notice if you do all the calculations what you get for lambda is exactly minus fx which is consistent with what I was expecting because lambda is the reaction force in which I implemented by the constraints of the mechanical system when the mass wants to violate the constraints then we get exactly what we want to expect. Right, this is exactly the forms implemented by Debye and the mask. Now, let's go back here. Because here we have a lot of elements which I leave with zero. notice that we are also lucky because x is constant so this term is equal to 0 because e dot is equal to 0 so we have an interesting simplification and by the end the motion the constrained motion that we have is exactly given by d x dot dot y dot dot which is the dynamic and consistent projection method multiplied by u which provides u exactly the same. Notice you have a motion only along the y component. We recovered exactly what we have already seen. But now the challenge is, let's try to solve just by using the physics the physics of this example. It's not possible. But we can address this example using the formalist that I have just introduced. Let's look also at this example just to sketch the solution back to the brain. What is the constraint? By the end, everything is inside the writing of the constraints. Once we have done this, then we are just to do the calculations. the constraint here is that the n-th factor must be constrained on moving on this circle of the right side with the center x0,1,0 so this is the constraint written with respect to r which are x and y are the two components which describe the position of n-th factor so here I have the expression k-r but we have to translate this into the joint variables, okay? And so, I have to write the x and y with respect to the joint variables, okay? So if you do some calculations, you have this expression for x and y, just the standard direct kinematics, you replace it to the constraint, and you have an expression of the constraints, which is a function of only q1 okay now you do all the calculations to derive all these audible matrices and so on and you can have the dynamical model of your system do some calculations of course we are not going to hold the values here we are just in the expression to derive the Chapo-Vian of the constraints once you have derived you have basically the dynamical model and the constraints that we can work with it to simulate the systems let's stop again Evidently. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Thank you. To be honest, I'm not sure I can compare it to the original model, but we'll see. what does no I'd like to have some my grandfather my grandfather liked it I'm happy for my grandfather happy birthday to grandfather So, yesterday, Simon, came at 10.15pm to send me this script. Without doing anything with you. I had told him that it was the big issue of the preview. This was the intention, for example, we had put this script on the screen. We put it on the screen. ... and every time I looked ... ... the room was full of people, they gave me a hand... ... and they were all very attentive... ... and they were very kind. ... they were very nice... ... and then? ... He wants to be the best! Yeah, he wants to be the best! He's a good guy, he's a good guy! No, he's a good guy! He's a great player! You know what I mean? I don't know how to explain it, I don't know. It's funny, it's funny, it's funny. It's funny, it's funny. Okay, so, you know, I don't know how to explain it. It's funny, it's funny, it's funny. Well, it's okay, it's funny. It's funny, it's funny. It's funny, it's funny, it's funny. I don't know how to explain it. You know, it's funny, it's funny. No, it's funny, it's funny. It's funny, it's funny. It's funny, it's funny. Thank you. and Thank you. I'm going to show you a few examples. I'm going to do it one by one. You can see it in the description. You can see it in the description. So maybe in the beginning you can put a few words. It's the same thing. Okay. It's simple. But it's better to have two words. It's the same thing. So maybe you can set a few words. So maybe you can set a few words. So maybe you can set a few words. Actually, we can do better from a mathematical point of view. N variables, N constraints. In my mind, there is immediately this idea. I can describe the dynamics of my system using N-N variables. Right. It's a general idea. Maybe it might happen that the n minus n variables do not have physical meaning but I have an equivalent description on my system. It is important that I am able to connect this n minus n variables with real variables. Okay. this is exactly what I want to try to do now, to obtain and reduce systems here we have our n constraints on our n generalized coordinates it is possible to use the description of the constraint of the dynamics to have n-th crusade dimensional configuration states so what I want to do is to just provide you the sketch of the trajectory because it is from a mathematical point of view a bit involved but just to have the flavor, the idea, ok, of what is happening just a comment, you might ask why I am bothering you with this mathematical description, all right but the simulator like in the joco is interactive, it implements this idea where there is interaction between environment and robots and so on ok, in some components of this simulator what you have to be honest is actually all these derivations because they allow you to describe the interaction of the robot in a really good way it is not just that you are fighting in the land or not fighting in the land, it depends on your physical force ok, so let's take these as a problem and then we are finished Okay, now what do we do? A is a matrix which is M by N, right? Where M is smaller than N. So we have a matrix like this. Let's complete the A matrix adding a D matrix in order to make this matrix square. And since A is correct the good news is that I can fill the matrix to complete the matrix A I use these metrics in such a way that these metrics are non singular and invertible we can do that because A is a full rank ok, what is A? A metrics such that A is non singular metrics put whatever you want actually to be honest there are some applications where you can put the matrix which is connected to the physics of the problem okay there are other situations where the physics of the problem is so complex that it is easier to put something right okay since it is invertible i can compute the inverse and to partition it into these two matrix E and F where here I have n columns. Here I have n minus n columns. Okay? And what we do, what we do, is to introduce a new set of velocities that we call the pseudo-velocities remember I have n variables I have n constraints in principle what I would like to do is to describe the dynamics of my system just using n minus n variables ok ok what is the dimension of d here I have n here I have n minus n right if I do d by q dot the dimension of FB is n minus m these are called pseudo velocities and it should be clear what is the next step to rewrite the dynamics of my system as a function of these pseudo velocities ok this is exactly what we do and also reduce the system. What is interesting, because, is that let me just go back to what I told you. It's fine if I'm able to rewrite the dynamics of my system just using this n minus n variables. I told you there are situations where these velocities do not have any physical means but since they are less, I have some advantages to solve the dynamics looking at these vectors the importance is that I have an inverse relation between these pseudo velocities and the real generalizer coordinates of course because these are the ones describing the two physics and actually the inverse relation is given by the matrix F that I have here I don't justify all these steps okay but just to tell you that of course I have to keep in mind that I need the inverse relation I can solve my system with the several velocities that they don't have the physical meaning I don't know in which world, in which planet they live. I solve their dynamics, but then I want to go back to the real system. And the relation is this. Of course, I need also the acceleration. I hope you have to do this. Just to fit the time derivative. Here there are some other relations. Okay? All these derivations exploit a list of algebraic relations. Okay? that I'm going to skip, but just to tell you that. Here are the features of this, which is given by this matrix. You have a really, really a lot of relations that you can derive among all these four matrices, like this for instance. That this product is equal to the identity and so on, okay. Because these relations are useful then to derive the dynamic model with respect to the pseudo velocities. Let's skip all these relations. There are some useful relations which are due to the fact that A, B, E, F are concatenated one with the other through this equality, okay? That allows you to do some calculations that we go directly to the end of the result, we can skip all So, these steps I want to just give you the message. Look. This is the dynamic model of my system in terms of the cellular velocities. Let's discuss it just by a few minutes this ratio Here you are Actually, let me write just some equations here It is producing fresh energy it's just to create the noise ok, ok, let me go fast These are velocities. So with all these acceleration, these in some sense is the inertia matrix inertia matrix for this new set of variables. Is that transpose B, which is the inertia matrix of my system? But this is a completely consistent because these are the partition areas and the M minus M column. So The dimension of F is n by n minus m. So when you pick here F transpose, what do you have is n minus m n, n by n, n by n minus m. So the matrix that you have here is n minus m times n minus m matrix. Okay, it's the initial matrix for the new set of variables V. V dot equal to P is for the P's. Okay. this is a dynamical system where the variables that you describe for which you describe the projectors are n minus m it's a reduced system and of course it depends on how many constraints that you have But solving this principle can be done in a faster way than an initial system. And what is interesting also is that you can derive the Lagrange multipliers vector as a function of the V quantities. Okay. It's the quantity that we were talking about here. As I said, it's a reducer vector. so we can do now we can derive the reduced system again for our simple example okay here we have v look the matrix is this let's reason together how can we complete the matrix say to be a two by two matrix which is invertible, let's just add this row 0, 1 so d is exactly here it's extremely simple okay and you can understand that it is extremely simple also to derive e and f here but notice here we have two variables one constraint right so what I expect is to describe the dynamics of So my system using a reduced model which is one dimensional. This is exactly what you get. Remember the definition of V is equal to DQ dot. Exactly the description of the reduced system. Here I have a physical meaning which is extremely clear. It's just the dynamics over the constraint. Alright, indeed what I have is exactly V equal to Y dot. This is the pseudo velocity which in this case as exactly if we are doing just for this case you can derive also lambda according to the formulas that we have seen previously again you get exactly minus fx as expected ok and this is the dynamics the reduced dynamics you do all the calculations and what you get is exactly m and y dot dot equal to f to y just a one dimensional system so what we have just seen is completely consistent with the previous derivation that we did thanks to high school physics okay okay just the last point Here in this case the pseudo velocities are directly connected to the physics. There are other situations, there are other situations where actually there is not this alien connection, okay. It depends on how you define the beam, okay. But you can mimic what we have seen here also for the case where the robot is constrained to stay over the scale of four instants. Okay. This limit model is useful because it is a compact description that can be used for signature. However, it can be used also for control design. Ok. Now we should go back, yeah. Ok. This is the equation of the emotions that we have derived in the previous slide. I have to design a you to satisfy. To reach sometimes. Look, if you design a you in this way. So if you replace you in this expression, in this line. You do the calculations here and here and by the end you are left with just these two equations So this is the double integrator and this is the node that allows you to design lambda This is extremely interesting because you have decoupled the design of the control line into two components. One is guiding the motion along the degree of freedom that you have. The other one is manipulating the force with which you interact with the environment. ok, now suppose that we consider this example again, a simple example suppose that actually the mass is just a pen ok, with which you have to exert some force in order to write something you move just along this direction wherever you ride. Acting on U1 you are motivating the speed by which you move. Acting on U2 you are motivating the force by which you ride. Let's consider another example. The tool of the robot here is the tool that you use to remove some material over the surface. You need to remove some material. To remove the material you need to exert some force. By experience you know that the amount of force that you have to apply is given by a technically developed law. So acting on u1 here you can calculate the speed by which as you move along the surface from which you want to remove the material Thanks to you two you are modulating the force that we will examine which is needed to remove the material This is a feedback linearization strategy So actually we use model with expression of lambda suggesting you in some sense also the feedback linearization strategy cannot lie to achieve the same task. Okay? Just to conclude, this is really the last slide. Here we started from the case where we have infinite stiff, both on the robot side and on the environment. Of course, the situation is more wide in the sense that we might have not completely rigid environment, not completely rigid robot. What we do here is to model the behavior of the environment of the robot, including a spring, which allows you to model exactly the fact that you might have some deformation. I don't want to enter into this topic. There is an entire chapter in the book if you are interested. It is just to tell you that what we can do is to write a more general theory with respect to what we have seen, including also the fact that we might have a last picture. the formation of both the robot and the planet here are the last two slides saying that you can also compliant here with both the robot and the planet ok let's stop here I hope that at least you get the high level sense of this lecture ok there is a beautiful mathematical view that allows us to describe also the interaction of the robot within my library, it is easy to use in many similar courses. So if one day in your life you think of us and design in your school, I bet you will like it. Let's meet tomorrow at 4.30. In my mind I have the markers. Have a nice day. I will upload the homework now, go back to the office. Maybe I have to create also the folder where to submit the second homework, right? Many things. Please write me in case I forget to reserve it. Thank you, bye! Bye, thank you. Bye Joe. No, put on pause, I mean. I'll cancel soon.