--- [Parte 1/6 • 00:00 - 12:11] ---

So, the first request is raise your hand if you wrote your username... No, that's the other way round. Raise your hand if you do not have your username, if you are using the computer. Ok. Good. Could you log in? Raise your hand if... Raise your hand if you couldn't log in in bilab. Ok. Why is that? Because you don't know how to log in or because it doesn't work? Doesn't work. What... Your account? I mean, your account is not accessible in bilab or the password is wrong? Not activated? You as well? Ok, ok. Oh, ok. Why? Because... Are you the sisters? You... Not in webeep? Yes. Because they told me that if they took the... Did you register late? Like this morning or yesterday? Because they told me, I connect the... Webeep users to bilab users, so everyone that is registered in webeep has access also to bilab. Ok. Ok. Mi sentite bene? Sì, abbastanza. Ok. ...e sento la voce... ...ricorda che poi la traccia... ...audio... ...però se no dai portalo a... Ok, grazie. Grazie. Another question is: Doesn't have ROS installed, already? Ok. Only four. Ok. Have you installed ROS? No, ok. It was the first... I can ask who did... Who not have ROS installed? Ok. Ok. Are you sure? And do you have any issues? I mean, errors or stuff like that? Ok, maybe later Mattia can... Can come to your... To check if something is wrong. Ok? So, yeah. We can start or we can... Yeah, we can start. So, Mattia, I just say two words, then can the students hear me in the other... Eh, just from my PC. Ah, ok. So, fine. Let's go. I introduce Mattia Fontana that is one of the teaching assistants that will guide you during the first tasks, we... You are going to do today. So, Mattia... Can you add Mattia, please? So, Mattia, you can... You can come like here. Mattia, we have five, six people that have not bilab... How many? How many people in... are in bilab or ROS? Six people. Ok. Now, I'm thinking maybe it could be good to move... No, I was wondering if it could be better to have all people in the other... Let's try like this, come on. Let's try like this. So, let's start. Okay? No, no. Eh... ...che non vorrei che andassimo a... ...e non so fatto... ...ah, non l'hai installato... Sì. ...ma me lo sto scaricando... Can you see my screen? Yes. Yeah. It's great. So, maybe we can start from here just to recap a little bit. Yeah. Yeah. Ok. So, maybe as Andrea already said to you, this year we are going to use Ubuntu... In particular, the Jazzy Jalisco distribution that runs on Ubuntu 24. Here you can see also the official documentation. So, you can see the installation instructions, some tutorials, and also, and of course, other concepts that we... So, my advice is to make familiar with this documentation because it's the documentation that we are going to use all over the course. So, let's define what is ROS. Maybe you already know. By the way, ROS, let's start from what is not. So, ROS is not a programming language because we write code for programs that we will see that we call them ROS nodes. We code these programs in C++ and Python. So, it's not a... ROS is not a programming language. It's not an operating system because ROS runs on top of your operating system, like most of the time on Linux. But from the point of view of the robot, it can be seen as an operating system because it offers some services and primitives. And ROS is not just a library. So, a general definition of ROS is a set of software libraries and tools for building robot applications. And it offers, for example, it offers command-line tools, graphical and simulation software, libraries, and build system, and many other components. So, ROS has many features. The first one is modularity, because instead of writing a huge and monolithic ROS application, we can decompose the ROS system, the ROS application, in many, in many modules, each one responsible for a dedicated, a specific task. These modules can also be run on many, on many machines, on many computers. So, ROS offers naturally distributed computations. These modules share the same interface, so they are easy to share and also to edit. And we can also debug and test each module individually and independent from each other. One major feature is the ROS community because there is a huge open source community that... And it means that, basically, you don't need to write all your modules from scratch, but maybe there are already these components available on GitHub. So, here you... You should have already installed ROS. If you... If you have not done it yet, you can do it now. It takes 10 minutes if you have the proper OS. And also we have the bilab. So, let's... Let's start with today's practice. So, the first thing that you have to do when you have installed ROS is to source the ROS environment. What does it mean? Basically, you need to tell to our, to your terminal where to find the ROS environment. To do so, you just have to copy and paste this, this command: so `source /opt/ros/jazzy/setup.bash`. Okay? By the way, if you open a new terminal, you need to redo this command every time, and this can be quite annoying. So, the first thing to do is to add this `source` command into your `.bashrc` file. So, and you can do it in this way. Okay? Okay, so this is basically the first thing to do when you install ROS. Okay? Now, let's see how to create a workspace, a package, and a ROS node, but first let's define this, this stuff. So, when we write a ROS application, we must organize our folder in this way: So, we have a workspace, that is basically the main folder that contains all your applications. Then inside the ROS workspace we have the `src` folder that contains our packages. So, the packages are the basic organizational unit in ROS and groups code and resources that are related to a specific functionality. And inside each, each package we then write our programs, our ROS nodes, that are basically the program that we run to perform a specific task. We will see in next episode that these nodes, these programs, can communicate with each other through ROS interfaces, through ROS messages. So, for example, here you can see the ROS workspace, here the `src` folder, and inside three packages. The first one, for example, is camera package that is responsible, for example, for managing the camera sensor. Inside you can see the camera node. Then, for example, we can see the perception package and inside you can see, for example, a detector and a segmentation node. And the control package that is, is responsible for controlling the robot. Okay.

--- [Parte 2/6 • 12:09 - 25:03] ---

Okay.

So, if you have some troubles with the ROS installation and Docker,gee, I can help you. So, yeah, we take 10 minutes to do that.

Um, sorry for interrupting you. Um, I um managed to install ROS on my Virtual Machine on my computer, but I would like to use the V-Lab. Um, uh, unfortunately, I am I had applied, but, like, couple of minutes ago, I was not able to access the V-Lab infrastructure. Uh, is it- do you happen to be in the place, you know?

Uh, I- well, we have the confirmation from the ICT people that it's active. It's just because everyone, I mean not everyone, but many of you are using it, so it's quite busy, so it takes a bit of time to respond, but I got confirmation from the ICT managers that it's online, so it should work.

Okay, because, like, I am checking right now.

Okay, I'm I'm unable to see it. I can't see the in the in the manual where they run require. Um, I also booked another Virtual Machine just to make sure, and I'm able to see uh, I'm not able to see the Intelligent Robotics uh Virtual Machine. Right now, it's uh, it's it's free. So, yeah.

Uh, I will ask uh what is going on.

All right. Thank you.

So, if there are some problem with ROS, I can help you.

--- [Parte 3/6 • 25:01 - 37:35] ---

So let's define what a what is a workspace according to the notebooks, but let's now see how to uh create a workspace. So we can say that the the workspace is the directory that contain your um gross project. So, to create a workspace is pretty easy. So it's just that to uh create a directory in the common make it, okay? So, with the common make it, minus P, Ross workspace and also the source folder. Pretty easy. So, now let's see how to create packages. Whether you are going to create a package, you have to decide if you want uh Python or a simple package. Uh in these courses uh we are going to make the example during the labs, with C++. You are free to use C++ or Python. Uh for example, we can see that uh um C++ package is composed by uh these files here. So we have the folder my package, inside there in the Cmake list that is a file that contains instructions to build the the uh the package. And the include directory where we will place the header file of our C++ code. The package XML and contain uh just a few metadata like the name of the package, the maintainer, the license, but also the dependencies of the dependencies of your package. And in the source directory we will place our C++ code. So, our node. Uh to create a package, the syntax is quite easy. We have to place inside the source folder, the source directory, so, Ross workspace, source directory, and then the syntax is ros2 package create minus minus build-type. Then we must specify how many C-make if we want a C++ uh uh C++ package, the license, of course, and the package. Then we specify the license, a patch and the. So, uh today, for the example we are just using this common here that already um create also a place holder node that is just uh uh Uh so to create a package, let's do it together. So now I'm I'm inside my workspace, my source space. Here you can see my source directory. To create a package, I have to go inside my source directory. And uh place the common ros2 package create, build type Cmake because we want to see a C++ uh um C++ package. The license, not main is the name of the node that we are going to create inside the package and the name of the package. So, once we run the the the command, we can see that Ross already provides for us um the structure of the package. So, inside the source directory, you can see here, our structure. So, we have the source directory, the you back that we have created. Um we have the include directory, that is empty for now, but we will place the header file, okay? Then we have the Cmake list, that is just uh um the list, let's say of um um instructions to build our package. Uh we will see in next episode how to um edit this file in order to work with uh other packages. The license that is just the license. And the package, we can see the name of the package, the version, uh the description, the email, and here, in the in the end, we will see also the dependency of the of the package. So, inside the source folder of my new package, we can see also our node that is called minus CPP, and it is just a hello world node. So, it is a main, a C++ name in which we print the hello world my package, okay? So, now that we have created the workspace, created the uh package and also a placeholder, let's say, holder um uh node, we have to build our uh workspace. Okay? To do that, we have to place inside our workspace. So, now, I in my workspace, not in the source actually, so remember to place in the workspace directory. And to uh build, we have to run the command colcon build, okay? Yeah. I put uh command back and register from the beginning, because my network was uh were going too fast. And so for them that is the first time, it's better to it was slower and if you started getting some sourcing the the environment, okay? Okay. Sourcing the environment, so So, explain why the getting why we are with Yeah. I would I would explain that how to to to to build the the the workspace. Yeah. So, once we have created the package and we put the our notes, we have to build the um our workspace, okay? In order to run the nodes, okay? To do that, okay, we have to place inside our workspace. So, remember not inside the source directory, so, here is stronger. We have to place inside the workspace. So, this is the part um, I am on, okay? So, now, uh, to build our workspace, so, in order to run our nodes, we have to run the command colcon build, okay? You can see that it's building and here you can see that our new package has been built. Okay? So, now you can see that in our workspace, there are other three three uh directories that are the that are just the output of our meetings, okay? And uh now we can run our notes, okay? So, to run a notes, the syntax is quite easy, because the syntax is

--- [Parte 4/6 • 37:33 - 49:39] ---

the name of the package and the name of the node. Okay? So, in this case is the name of the package that is my package and the name of the node that is my node. Okay? We can see an error here because our terminal doesn't know where to find our node. Okay? In order to make our terminal know where to find our new packages, we have to source our workspace. So, the same as as we have seen before that we source the ROS environment, here we have to source our workspace. To do that, the command is this one. So, inside the workspace, okay? The command is source install setup.bash. Now that we have installed source our workspace, if we run our node, we can see that the the the node does not and the output is here. Okay? We can maybe restart from scratch. So, because it's the first time, so we need to take some time. So, we have seen how to source the ROS environment. That is the first thing to do when once you have installed ROS. Okay? The command is source opt ros jazzy setup.bash. Okay? Every time that you open a new terminal, you have to tell to the terminal where to find the ROS environment. So, every time that you open a new terminal, you have to repeat this command here. Okay? In order to avoid this, remember to add the source command into your bashrc file. In this way, you do not have to repeat every time this command every time that you open a new terminal. Okay? So, then we have seen what is a workspace. That is you have said that a workspace is the main folder in which you put all your ROS application. Okay? Inside the folder, so inside ROS workspace, inside the ROS workspace, you you must create the source directory that contains your packages. So, your folder ROS is organized into packages and each package is responsible to for a specific functionality. Inside our packages, we place our programs. Okay? So, that in ROS are called ROS nodes. And each node must be responsible for an atomic specific task. Okay? So, for example, here we have the ROS workspace, the source directory, and inside we can see three packages. Okay? The camera package, for example, for the sensing, so that is responsible for dealing with the camera sensor. Okay? With the data from a camera sensor. And inside of the package, we can see the camera node. That is actually the program that deal with the camera sensor. So, to create a workspace, we have said that is a directory. So, from the documentation, we can find the you can find the command here that is just make directory. Okay? Make directory command. Okay? So, make directory -p ros_workspace and source. So, Who Who does have the source directory now? Who Who is the source directory? Who was not able to create it? Okay. So, we can go on now that we have the source directory and the workspace in the run. Any question? Yeah. The source command does not does not really does not work really well for me. So, I don't know. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But But wait a moment because this guy has my same operating system, the operating system, so it just told me something. Okay. So, we can go on now that we have the source directory and the workspace in the run. And now that we have created the workspace and the source directory inside the workspace, we can create the package. Okay? Here is the documentation to understand how what is a package and how to create a package. So, when we create when we have to create a package, we must decide if you want to create a Python or a C++ package. Okay? We can see here the structure of a C++ package. Okay? So, the structure is the name of the folder with the name of your package. Inside it, we we see the CMakeLists.txt that is just a text file that contains instructions to build your package. The include directory that contains other files for C++ as folder. And the package.xml that just contain metadata like the name of your of your package, the dependencies, the email, the license, etc. etc. In the source directory, whereas we have the our nodes, so our folder, let's say our programs. Okay? To create a workspace, what we have to do is to place inside the source directory, okay? And run the command here. So, and the syntax is quite easy. So, ros2 package create --build-type ament_cmake if you want a C++ package or ament_python if you want a Python package. Then we define the license and the package name. Okay? So, today I'm going to use this command here, ros2 package create --build-type ament_cmake. And here we have also the node name. In this way, we create also a a placeholder node inside the new package that that is just an hello world node. Okay? So, I have already done it, so we can So, to create a package, I have to go inside my source directory. Now I am here. Okay? Outside the workspace and inside the source directory. To create a package, I'm going to use this command. So, ros2 package create --build-type ament_cmake --license the license --node-name my_node and my_package. Okay? So, let's run the the command and we can see that ROS already implement for us all the structure. So, we can see the CMakeLists.txt. Okay? We will see in next lessons how to edit this CMakeLists.txt to work with other packages. We can see the package.xml. We can see some metadata, so the name of the package, the version, the description, and so on. And here we can see we we will see also the dependencies of our package. And our node is placed inside the source folder in my package. Okay? This node is just an hello world node, so it just it is just a main a C++ main in which we print hello world my package. Okay? So, Are you able to run this command here to create a package and to see the node? Okay? From the other room, are there some questions? Questions? Okay, since everyone is on board,

--- [Parte 5/6 • 49:37 - 01:02:38] ---

Okay. So, now that we have created a package and also created the node, to run our node we have to build our our workspace. Okay? So, as a C++ project, we have to build the project basically. The same as for Rust workspaces. So, to build our workspace, we have to go inside our workspace. So, we have to place here, not in this those directory. Okay? So, from the from the Rust to workspaces, we can run cargo build. That is the command to build your workspace. Here there are some more news. We can see that our workspace has been built. And here you can see that the from the start of the directory, we can see three additional directories in the workspace that are built, installed, and opened. Okay? That are just the outputs of your build. Okay? So, now in order to make your terminal know where to find your your your new packages, you have to source the workspace as we as we have done before for for the Rust environment. So, do anyone have errors up to here? Everything's working? Okay. So, once that we have built our package, our workspace, we can we must source our workspace. To do that, the command is source from the workspace, source install setup.bash. Okay? And now we can run our node with the syntax Rust to run the name of the package, that is my_package, and the name of the node, that is my_node. You can also press Tab in order to autocomplete once you have sourced your workspace. And you can see that I can run my package. Any problem?

--- [Parte 6/6 • 01:02:36 - 01:15:10] ---

Okay, let's finish the last things. Okay. So, now that we have been able to run our, you know, Hello World node, what I want also to say to you is that every time that you make some modification to your code, so for example, you want to print some something else, we have to rebuild. Okay? So, if now I I've done some modifications, so if I run now my my node, my output is the is the one before because we have to build the the the, sorry, the workspace. Okay. Remember also to source your workspace and and now So, as a small exercise that we can start from now and we will see let's let's say the next lesson, you can modify this node and make a counter node that just print every n seconds the counter, okay? This is just the the exercise and we will see the solution next time and we take and we will take it as the introduction. Okay? If there's some question, I'm here. 

Sir, may I ask a question?

Yeah.

I'm not sure I understood the assignment. So...

Yeah, you just have to modify this node, okay? And make it prints a counter every two two seconds, for example.

Okay. Okay. Thank you. Thank you.