GIà TAGLIATA

And then, the second part of the lecture, what I want to do is introduce an important concept, which is the Phoenix-Jacoby interaction techniques. OK. So let's just recap where we are. Ok. We have power row with a camera mounted here and the end effector mounted solid to the end effector Ok? And while moving, this camera keeps taking pictures How to use this information in such a way that we are able to drive the robot from initial position to a final position? This is the only information that we have. The first solution is to try to use this information to estimate the relative pose of a robot. of them with respect to the base because if we are able to do that, it means that we are reconstructing something three dimensional structure of this, ok? So we can resolve through the algorithms basically, here, for example, you see. So just to be more precise, so far we have designed our algorithms at the joint level, OK. When I reconstruct the pose of that effect or with respect to the base frame, I have information of the Cartesian level. But after the computer vision topics that will be concluded Tuesday morning, I will show you how we can rewrite the algorithms that we have seen at joint level directly at the Cartesian level, OK. There is some formulation that we have to do, but this is possible. When I'm saying here that I can use the visual information that I gather from the camera to reconstruct the relative force between the benefactor and the base, I refer that I can use the algorithms that the designer can take the conditions base. there is nothing from the control point. OK? So I told you using pictures, there are several methods that we can use to reconstruct the pose. OK? There are analytical methods. There are numerical methods. Here in this class, I decided just to present one method. which is analytical, okay? There are also numerical reports that we can use. Actually I have some notes I can give you for the ones who are interested. But the analytical solution is quite elegant, I have to say. So it makes sense to present also because it refers to an extremely important problem in the literature which is the PMP problem, okay? So actually what we do precisely is the following. we assume to have an object some area of the environment ok, which is the one we have here we suppose to have some important points over this object, ok you can assume directly to have this points ok and what we have is the information related to this points The coordinates with respect to reference frame, which is attached to the object. And the measurements of the position of these points in the image plane of the camera. These are the information that we need. OK? So we add these objects with a corresponding reference frame. Here we add the base frame. We have a reference frame, which is attached to the camera. The problem, actually, that I want to solve, based on the information that I just mentioned, is to find the relative pose between the object and the camera. It should be clear that, once I have this information, the problem of having the relative pose between and the factor of the basis. Because first of all, since the camera is solid, the end-effector, the relative pose between the end-effector frame and the camera frame is constant. Camera and end-effector translate and rotate in the same way. So the relative pose between the frame attached to the end-effector and the frame attached to the camera is constant and we can assume to have this knowledge in advance. We can assume, actually this is what typically we do, that the object is not moving, is still. We saw also the relative pose between the frame of the object and the frame of the base is constant. The base is not moving, the object is not moving, the relative pose is constant. Again, we can assume that this is no facts. Is that clear? So once I am able to estimate this, I am able to estimate this. But this seems I know this. I can estimate also this. Yes? It's not too late for understanding. OK. It's not only too late, but it's starting to be too warm also. We need to suffer maybe during the winter. And today is also too noisy. OK. Yesterday, we saw a bit of things. Let me just sketch what we have. OK. So here we have the high point. Remember that here, in the object, we have endpoints. OK? What is the information that we have that we use, are these coordinates, OK? What is roio? These are the coordinates of the point i with respect to the region of the object, the frame, or with respect to the object frame. to say in a simpler way, are the coordinates of this vector in the actual vector, OK? Which is, this knowledge is known in advance, OK? The other knowledge that we have, is that the point here, we can measure is a position in the image plane. We can measure the pixel coordinates. This is typically what we do, but inverting that relation that we saw yesterday. I can get the normalized coordinates, okay? Remember that this is just a matter of inverting this relation. Where we have these metrics with the intrinsic parameters of the camera. Okay? Let's see if I have it here. No. Could be somewhere. Yes, it's just a matter. We measure, this is just a matter of In this relation we have the normalize coordinates. Yes, the day after some manipulation, and actually here it was too late indeed to understand this relation try to explain it, but we reached this relation. Lambda i, S i tilde equal to the matrix capital pi, T O C i O i O tilde, OK. We have a relation like this. And I told you, this is not. Here we have the normalized coordinates of the point i. It's the homogeneous representation, which means that Sip is a three-dimensional vector with the last component equal to 1. But we know, also, this is the homogeneous representation of the coordinates of point i with respect to the object of frame of the fourth coordinate, here is equal to 1, as usual. OK, the problem that we want to solve is this given n relation like this, can I reconstruct the matrix E of C? Is that OK? This is the problem that we want to solve. the metrics, you'll see is this one, so how many numbers to have, you could compute, twelve numbers, which actually, yes, is twelve numbers, and remember that we have the constraint on the rotation matrix. So actually the numbers that they want to to compute that less because remember the orthogonality of the constraints of the rotation matrix. So here I don't have nine free numbers, of course. What is this vector? This vector is the vector joining the original camera frame with the original object frame with respect to the camera frame. Here I have the rotation matrix accounting the relative orientation between the object frame and the camera. So our goal is to compute this linear, and then a relation that we'll discuss. How to deal with this problem? First of all, this problem in the literature is called the PMD problem, The introspective end point problem, and there are plenty of papers addressing this problem, is an old problem. OK? So first of all, the kind of solution that you can find depends on how many points you have, and in some sense, the geometric relation that the points have among themselves. Let's just look at the list that I have here. I put them here. If you have three points, they are not collinear. Actually, to the previous problem, you found four solutions. In the case you have four or five points, if the points are not collinear, in general, you have at least two solutions, but if the points are coplanar. Consider the case of four points. They are coplanar, which means that they are all on the same plane. There is one plane containing all the points. But if among the four points, you pick any possible triplet, no triplet of points are collinear. Okay? So it's not good because three points are on the same line. This is good because there are no triplet of points, okay? Which lies on the same line. In this case, you can prove that the solution of the problem is unique. In order to guarantee in any case the uniqueness of the solution that you find, that actually is what we want because the solution that we want is 1. Okay? If you pick at least 6 points that are not open-ending, then the solution is unique. Okay. What we do is to consider the case where we can do some calculations and to find an analytical grade solution. Okay? And in particular, we restrict to this case for points which are compliant with the condition that we cannot have a situation like this. Okay, let's do some interesting algebraic manipulations and let's see how to deal with the problem. Let me make this assumption. All the points on the same plane. Just for simplicity, is a simplification which actually is not the generality of the solution that I am going to present. But since the points here, the coordinates of the points are taken with respect to the object frame, what I assume is that all the points in this case, lies exactly on this face of the solid that I have, which means that the third coordinate of all the points is equal to 0. Okay? So I'm assuming that my points, my four points have all the z coordinates equal to 0. Let me stress one more time that if you look at the picture, it means that all the points lies exactly on the plane determined by x0, y0. Okay? Yes. Is a simplification, is not there affecting the validity of the procedure that I will show you. But it allows us to just to simplify simple creation, The more general case is a case where you can convert your problem to this by rotation and with translation. not affecting the generality of this. Okay? 


Okay. First, think that we do is to pre-multiply, to pre-multiply both the derivation that we had by this skew-symmetric matrix. which is deep and all of these vectors and sin theta. Okay. S, S sin theta is an skew symmetric matrix which is built over the three dimensional vector S sin theta. Remember that if a is a three dimensional vector and I want to build the skew symmetric matrix built over this vector. We know that the diagonal is equal to 0. Do you remember what are the components of the skew symmetric matrix? What do we have here? az. You may remember why I'm not sure. It's az, right? So here you have minus az. What do we have here? minus A y, right? And so here I have A y. So for sure these are Ax. We just need to determine where is the minus? Oh, maybe here. Okay, perfect. Remember that the third coordinate of xi tilde is equal to one. Okay. Which means that here, here, we have one minus one for this specific. So let's do this multiplication. Okay, first of all let me tell you where I want to go. Here we have design relations. I want to convert the set of design relations into a linear problem. Into a linear set of linear equations. Why? Because when I have linear equations, I know how to move. Let's go back to a linear algebra class. Okay. And that we can found the solution. Okay. What is interesting is the following fact that if you compute Si tilde, S tilde is equal to zero. This is an interesting simplification because it allows me to have zero here, this matrix. Okay, I just do that. Let me show you yourself about that. Okay? Just to take the vector a multiply here. You can realize that this is okay. Now, let me discuss with you these. We explore the fact that the third component of this vector, which is r, z, is equal to zero. By assumption, I am assuming that all the points that I'm considering have the the third component, the z component equal to 0. Which means that the third component of this vector, this is the homogenous representation of the last one is equal to 1, the third element here is equal to 0. OK? Which means, actually, that when you compute the product between this and this vector, you are killing the third column of this matrix. right? What is the third column? Is the third column of the rotation matrix ROC. OK? So actually, what I want to tell you is that, despite the fact that the third component of this vector is equal to 0, I can simplify the product that I have here. OK? And in particular, you can easily convince yourself about that. The product that I have here is exactly the product that I'm reporting here. Well, let me leave the S aside. Here, I have this ancient matrix, which is the Planck homography. For the students taking the computer vision class, I guess that you have seen the homography matrix. Yes or no? or less. These are questions generated in LUQ. What do you have inside the H-matrix? Of course, the first column of the rotation matrix here, the second column of the rotation matrix. So R1 is the first column here. R2 is the second column. The third column is cleaved by the fact that the third component of this vector is equal to 0. And here what I have is that the translation vector. Okay? It's credible, right? Multiplying here instead of taking also the fourth component, I have eliminated, I have just the x component, sorry it's not eliminated because it becomes the third component. I'm forgetting the third component which is equal to 0. And I have just the x component and the y component, and 1. Okay? So now, what I do is to play with this relation. okay? Now it is time to convert this relation into a linear relation. Just a comment, it is not a problem. It is not a problem that I have a key. That there is a column of the relations. 1. If you have 2 columns of a rotation matrix, we know also how to get the column is just the cross product of the first 2 columns. Is that okay? So in doing that, when I previously told you that I don't have to find numbers of a rotation matrix because I have constraints. Now I'm playing exactly this card on this simplification. We have just the first two columns. I can get to the third column just by the cross product between these two columns. So by the end, what I want to find is just r1, r2, and then r3 will be r1 cross r2. Now I have this relation. this is known, this is known, this is what I want to know. This is what I want to know. Notice that here I have a 3 by 3 matrix, by a 3 by 3 matrix by a column vector. So by the end here I have a column vector. Do you know the vectorization map? So basically if you have a matrix, the vectorization of the matrix A. So suppose that you write A, these are the columns, A1 is an entire column. Okay? Is not just one. Up to An which is the nth column, the vectorization of A is a map that takes the matrix and converts it into a column vector. How? You take the columns, you start one below the other, so you have A1, A2, Al, okay? So there is an interesting property, that I want to remind you. Suppose that you have the product between vectorial elements, okay? A, B, C. The vectorization of the product of these matrices is equal to C transpose Chromaker a multiplied by the fact of b. This should be corrected that they get can check. So you will get a break. Do you know that the maker? No, no problem. A chromaker b, a and b are two matrices. is just this. Just for simplicity, let me suppose that it is a square. Actually, we can take m rows and columns in a general way. So basically is a bigger matrix A CHROMECOR B. So for each element of A into A CHROMECOR B, what you do is to replace and make the element A11 in here with a matrix, which is A11 multiplied by the matrix B. Here you have A12 B and so on. Of course, here I'm skipping a bit of details because you must have the consistency between the dimensions of the matrix in such a way to have these well-defined, but why do I like this operation? Look, because if I apply the vectorization here, this is the key point. If I apply the vectorization to this element, and you apply this expression, You have here a matrix which is this transpose, Cro-Maker this, multiply by the vectorization of the B-matrix, which is the one in the middle, which is the vectorization of H. So you have a matrix, big matrix, multiply by a vector, which is the vector, which has the unknown quantities that I want to estimate. Is that clear? So you have the big matrix where inside there you have all elements which are known. Multiply by a vector where you have all the unknowns that you want to know. Okay? So basically by the end you have something like this. Ax equal to 0 just to use standard notation, where A is a matrix with all quantities that you know. X is the vector containing the quantities that you want to compute. Okay? So the vector h here is the vectorization of the matrix h. So what is, let's write, let's write, so we make it more concrete. So h is R1 and R2. and here we have OCOC. Right? Is correct? Yes. So what is H vector is R1, R2, OCOC. Is that OK? What we are inside the matrix AI, SI, which depends exactly on this, according to what I have written previously is the chromaker product between these row vectors so, A, I, S, I, which is this matrix so h is a nine dimensional, right? A nine dimensional vector. We will see what is the dimension of A, I, S, I. This is equal to this transpose, So I have Rxi, Ryi, Rzi, Kronecker Ssi tilde. According to the expression that I wrote previously. What is this Kronecker? This Kronecker is Rxi multiplied by this matrix. matrix. Ryi in the right is matrix. Remember that the sorry, this is of course this is my mistake. It's not that I, this is equal to one. Of course, sorry my mistake, sorry. What is the dimension of the ESI? Look here. How many rows? How many? Yes. How many columns? How many columns? Nine. Nine. Three by nine multiply the vector h, which is 9x1 Is that ok? Did you follow at least the ideas? Then, of course, you have to check by yourself all the pipeline of this calculation but the situation is this the situation is this we were able to transform this relation that if you talk with experts they say it's linear, you say why linear? I have a matrix, I'm a bit confused because you use the vectorization idea. Using the vectorization idea it's clear that this is linear because it is a univariate to this. Why? Because it is linear with respect to h. but the problem is that the situation is this. So we have a flat matrix by a long vector. It is possible just with the one point to solve the problem? No. I need to add something more here. We know this is a problem in the algebra, right? What is the problem? First of all, the problem is this. You can prove that the rank of the matrix S is equal to 2. Okay? Which means that the rank of this matrix is equal to 2. Okay? I told you that we have how many points? Four points. We are considering this case. So what we do here is to add other blocks. Okay, because we have four points. So by the end of the system that we have is this. How many rows? We have four points, four by three is equal to 12. Nine columns, nine unknowns. The temptation is to say, I've done a signal, because the rank of each single block is equal to 2. So the rank here is 2. The rank here is 2. The rank here is 2. The rank here is 2. The total rank is smaller or equal to 8. OK? actually, here is where the assumption that no triplet of points are collinear enters. Because under the assumption that no triplet of points are collinear, we have that this rank is exactly equal to 8. We have the independence of the blocks. OK? So actually, under the assumption for which we started here we are exactly a Okay, not bad. Not bad. Basically, here we are ranking which means to have eight linearly dependent conditions 9 unknowns we can open to find the solutions. Yes but up to a scaling factor. This is what the linear algebra talk as during the first year of our bachelor degree, right? So this is the situation. We have four points. S1, S2, S3, S4, okay? It's clear. It's a little better here than here, of course. System of twelve equations with nine unknowns So, it can be shown that considering set of four points of the non-trivial, linear points, matrix A has rank eight in the system of equations. That means no new solution cH defied up to the scaling factor of c. We are still hoping that we didn't explode. R1, R2 can be any vectors. It's a rotation matrix. So the size of R1, the size of R2, is equal to. Let's go back to the first direction of this class, the end of February. What is the meaning of a rotational matrix? What do you have, inside the first column? The coordinates of a unit vector written with respect to another frame. It's the coordinates of a unit vector, which means that the length of this column, the length norm of this column must be equal to 1. So we have still this constraint to be used. if you solve in a direct way this system you get a solution up to a scaling factor but then there is a way to fix c because I have to impose this constraint okay this is what I do indeed okay Supposedly you get the free solution, h1, h2, h3. We have this relation, because I remember the meaning of the h matrix. How to find the value of c? I use exactly the fact that this must be equal to 1, OK? So C would be equal to 1 over the norm of H1, which, given the structure of the problem, is also equal to 1 over the norm of H1. OK? Done. Almost done. because once I have one R2, I can reconstruct also the third column of the matrix ROC, which is the cross product between R1 and R2. Is that OK? Why I like the analytic solution? Because I have closed form formulas. Closed form, let's take that. Provided that I get an efficient way to calculate one answer, which is the solution of this problem. But this is a linear system. To solve a linear system can be done with dedicated software software in a really fast way. So actually, this solution is working in real time. If you have a robot moving, taking pictures at really high frame, you can reconstruct the relative pose in real time, because if we have the solution analytically, they're already there. There are also efficient numerical algorithms which are imperative, which in some cases could take more time. Okay, this is the reason why we look if possible for analytical solution, okay?


 Yesterday, one of your colleagues posed me an interesting question. How realistic is it to assume I have these points, that I know the position, and so on? If you work in a structured environment, it's actually what you do. Okay? In any computer vision lab, you have interest, point of interest, are called markers, that it is easy to identify them. Okay? But of course, this is true if you are in a structured environment. But for a company inside a building where everything is structured, You can assume that this is the case. Of course, if you have a drone flying outdoor, no. It's a bit less. In any case, this situation can cover a lot of interesting situations. Outdoor for a drone, maybe we should give it to Israel, a different one. But let's appreciate the idea, the elegance of the solution, OK? We use some minerals and the tools, we exploit the structure of the problem, and we were able to get the solution. Please concentrate, when reading this material, to understand what is the input that you have. Okay? And what are the output that you want? When you design a, half of the work is to understand the inputs, the outputs that you want to get in the middle. Almost always we can do something. Okay? Okay. Okay, what I show you is just a particular case of a general method which is called direct linear transformation. You can find a lot of papers if you like it in the literature. several papers about that, okay? Uh, in particular, the sixth point is quite interesting to do so, but we don't have the time to. Actually, I want to discuss with you this fact. When you take measurements through images, there is a problem. There is a kind of noise which is audible. because you cannot easily model it through Gaussian distribution and stuff like that for people working in signal processing it's quite often suppose that you want to measure a quantity x through some instruments y is your measurement but what you have typically is an additive noise. Okay. Typically, the assumption that we made, we make about the noise is that it is a Gaussian noise with zero mean and with some values. Okay. So how to get, how to improve. Okay. If you take just one measurement, What is the best guess that you can do about x? What I can say is that the best estimate is exactly 1. How to reduce the, the variance of your estimate? I take four measurements, okay? So I don't take just one measurement. What I do is to pick a measurement. Okay. If the measurements that you take are independent one with the other, but the distribution of the noise is identical over all the measurements, taking the average of the measurements allows you to reduce a lot of the values. And to the center. Theorem, you can prove that if f goes to infinity, your estimate, your average converges exactly to the true value. But of course, everything here is true because we are assuming that these are Gaussian noises. Unfortunately, in computer vision, there are so-called outliers. Nothing is more random than the outliers. So actually what we need to assume, unfortunately, is that the measurements that we take of the point in the image plane can be affected by some audible noise. Let's say that what we do, again, is to increase the number of points, not just 4. let's take a lot of points also here okay hopefully this is helping us sometimes what you do is you understand if some of these points is the result of some outlier which means that it doesn't fit with your model okay so you try to eliminate and then you keep just the points that seem to be reasonable which in any case, are affected by some noise that you assume to be Gaussian and you try to estimate the h through some least square procedure so is least square standard procedure ok this is actually what do you do in practice but there are already dedicated software that solve the problem for you ok, just to show you that that in practice we need to face with a presence of noise. But the story is not yet finished. Because you reconstruct it, OK? Through what I show you, you can get R1, R2, R3. But remember that since in any case we have a finite number of points, The h vector, the solution that you find here, is just an approximation of course. And in particular, it would happen that when you reconstruct the matrix with R1, R2, R3, this is not a precise rotation matrix. This is due to the fact that the h is just an approximation of the true solution. And so what you are able to do as last step is to take this matrix, which is not a rotation matrix. And you project this matrix into the center of the rotation matrices. Is that OK? So these are all the steps that we need to perform. OK? So we have noisy measurements. When I work in computer vision, I need to discriminate if some of the measurements is affected by outliers. Then I restrict it just to the subset which are allowable. I assume that these noises are kind of Gaussian noises. I solve this square problem to get R1, R2, and that other vector, OK? I get that this is a good guess of the rotation matrix, but actually it's not a rotation matrix, OK? Because they are not orthogonal with each other. What you have to do, typically, if you have a set of elements, you have a point outside, but you want to stay inside the set, what you do is to project this element into the desired set. So you pick inside the set the points whose distance the smallest one with respect to this point. Good, but the points now are rotation matrices. And here you have a matrix. What you have to do is to add a notion of distance between matrices, right? This is called Rubini's norm, blah blah blah okay? Really nice story. go. What time is it? Break time. Maybe not a little bit, but let's conclude this step Okay, what we have is TOC, right? But notice that since B CE, okay, is known because it's constant. It's known in advance. toc is the one that we have reconstructed now. From this elevation I can have tcb. Notice that tcb is equal to tcb multiplied by toc. Let me just emphasize. so by the end I left, and it's right. Now you should be familiar with this game with the starter subscript, OK? So this is known in advance, I have just estimated this. By inverting the derivation, I get the relative positive between camera and base. But I want to have an effector with respect to the base. okay that is not difficult right? because okay I didn't put here the final, but it's just a matter to discuss together let's look at this expression, this is just the one that I have to construct construct, right? This is constant. So it can have also the relative force between object and the factor. Right? So if you invoke the same relation there, so you can have this in your notes if you want. We have also this. Yes. Actually, what I want to add is the derivative poles between the factor base, right? Again, write this relation. This is known in advance because this is constant object the base there are motions and known in advance. These can be reconstructed from this, okay, because this is what I have reconstructed. There are because between the camera and the factor is constant because the camera is a song that we have the factor. So I have the knowledge over P, O, T, which is this. By inverting this relation, you can get to this. Stop. Is that ok? 5.40? Yeah. The bell tower has bells. 19 and 30 but I'm going to do it anyway, so be patient. I can't do it right now. I'm going to start tomorrow. This is the first time I've ever seen the sun. It's a bit worrying, but it's okay. I'm going to put on my sunglasses. I'm going to put on my glasses. I'm going to put on my sunglasses. I'm going to put on my glasses. I'm going to put on my sunglasses. I'm going to put on my sunglasses. I'm going to put on my glasses. I'm going to put on my sunglasses. I'm going to put on my glasses. Change your point of view.



Now, what I want to do is to solve the problem directly working in the image plane. The problem is that of driving the manipulator from initial position to a final position. We have seen a way to reconstruct the relative pose, which allows me to use everything that I have already done. Now actually, what I want to do is to use the information coming from camera to evaluate the directory and narrowing image plane, OK? And to see if I am able to solve the problem in this way. OK? Which actually is quite interesting, because with a camera I am projecting three-dimensional world into a two-dimensional plane. And basically, I'm projecting what's going to happen into a plane. I want to see if this is enough information that I have there to solve the problem. I need to introduce a new Jacobian. You are here. Now, what is a Jacobian? The Zirconian is a mark between velocities, right? So the Zirconian that we have seen so far is a mark between the velocities at the joint level with the velocities that we have at the angle factor level. Here the Zirconian that I want to use is still a relation between velocities. On one side, I have the velocity of the image plane of the feature. On the other side, I have some velocities which are first in the manipulator. Or to the camera, which is attached to the manipulator. Okay. For today, what we do is to build this relation. Maybe, I don't know if we have enough time. And we will explore this knowledge on Tuesday morning to design the controller. Okay? This is the plan. Okay. Yes, everything is at noon after we introduced this. I needed to talk about velocity. So, now, suppose that the object that we considered in the previous slides slides actually is moving. So there is a relative velocity of the object with respect to the camera. But I would like to stress this fact. That actually, you have a relative motion of the object with respect to the camera. Also if the object is not moving but the camera is moving. OK? so this is the Co is exactly this relative velocity when I write in subscript c it means that I'm evaluating this vector with respect to the camera frame okay? it's the velocity in terms of force so we need to add a velocity concerning the linear part the transmission and the velocity is related the change of relative orientation okay? so what do we put here? let me try to do here we have our base frame okay? here we have our camera frame let me just denote Instead of writing x, y, z, just the letter, the notation, the camera here, we have the frame of the object. OCO is this vector, OK, joining the origin of camera frame with the origin of object frame. Return with respect to the camera, so to consider the linear velocity, I want exactly to see how this vector is changing over time. So let me just take the time derivative of this vector. This is the position of the velocity. What about the way we change the relative orientation? Here, the path that I want to track is the one given by the angular velocity vector. OK. In general, I have a number velocity vector denoting how the object frame is changing its orientation. I have a number velocity vector telling me how the frame attached to the camera is changing its orientation. How they are changing the relative orientation, what I need to do is just to do the difference between these two angular velocity vectors. EO minus BC, sorry, omega O minus omega C is telling me how is changing the relative orientation between the two frames. Remember that what is nice about the angular velocity vector is that they can sum them. To build the geometric jacobian, if you remember, We sum the angular velocity vector of each joint, so it's a vectorial space. We can sum this vector. This is exactly this idea that we're using. But since I want to write this with respect to the camera frame, what you have to do, since written in this way, they refer to the base frame. I need to pre-multiply this vector by what? So by the matrix r, e-r to b, remember when there is no subscript I refer to the base frame. So by this matrix, I write this vector express with respect to the base frame, and with respect to the camera frame. But this matrix is equal exactly to rc transposed. This is the reason why we are using rc transposition. Is that OK? OK. So here I reported a longer description. Okay, so just to describe what the elements are to be here. OCO, this vector, is also equal to the difference between this vector minus these. This is the vector OO. This is the vector OC. The difference provides me this vector. Since I want to express this vector with respect to the camera frame, I have to bring up the line, by this option. Is that okay? Perfect. Perfect. Now, as I said, we have a bunch of the counter of points of the object. These points provides me the projection of these points in the image plane provides me the normalized coordinates that I built based on this feature vector x. Ok. And what I want to discuss Is the relation that I have between the velocity by which the feature vector changes, with respect to the relative velocity that I have between the object and the camera, as frankly, there's a camera. What we have is, again, a matrix ruling this relation, which is this matrix, Jx. Now we will try, of course, to compute this matrix, but first of all, let me tell you that this matrix Jx is called the image. OK? It's the relation that I have between the velocity by which the future vector changes, the image plane, with respect to the relative velocity that we have between the object and the camera, velocity written in the camera frame. OK? Of course, if the dimension of S is K, suppose that you have n points. Each point has a 2 normalized coordinates. In this case, K will be 2 pi n, of course. The velocity vector that we have here is 6 dimensional, so the image Jacobian is a k by 6 matrix, of course. OK. Just a comment, but it's not surprising. Of course, the relation, the image, the images of the program depend on the current future vector, x, and also the relative force that we have between the object and the camera. This should be quite intuitive that these metrics depend on the current value of x and on the current magnet of the next use. To investigate the big connection of these metrics, we need to do other calculations first. Let's at least start to see that, but we will conclude on the terms that we have. OK. What is the next step? The next step is the following. Here you have a relation between s dot and vcoc. Now, starting from this relation, actually we want to find the relation that we have between s dot and the absolute velocity of camera and object, but written again with respect to the camera frame. OK? Let's try to derive now this relation. Try to appreciate the difference. Here I'm looking at the relative velocity that I have between object and camera. Here I'm looking at the absolute velocity of the camera and of the object. But they express again this vector with respect to the camera as well. OK? Ok. How can I write this vector? That's the reason to get there. Now I am going through some math, which actually is not complicated. We need just to pay attention to the formula, but it's not complicated. If you want to consider Vc, which is the absolute velocity for the camera frame. Okay, here I can say, previous but let me, here we have a camera object that is K. So if I want to consider the absolute value of the camera frame, What I have here is the velocity by which this vector is changing. Is the vector joining the origin of the basic frame with the camera frame? Is that OK? And here you have the angular velocity vector, omega c, which tells me how the camera frame is changing its orientation with respect to the basic frame. Right? Do you agree? So, this is one way by which we decided to describe how the pose of the frame is changing. Okay. So we have the positional part and the orientational part. Since I want to write this vector with respect to the camera frame, what I do is to pre-multiply both the elements by a single expression. Is that okay? This way the quantities are written these vectors with respect to the character. Now what I want to add inside B O is the same quantities but concerning the object frame. So I get the vector O O vector joining the original base frame and the original object frame. here I have O of O of dot, here I have the angular velocity of M. Since I want to write this vector with respect to the camera frame, what I have to do is to do frame multiplying all the elements by a sum constant. Okay? And so, this justifies the fact that here we have the sub-extremes. Okay. Remember what is the goal? The goal is to reprise the previous relation, which is function of this velocity with respect to this velocity written in the color gray. So let's go back to the definition of this element. This vector, which is the vector OCO. Originally the camera frame is exactly this vector. Remember that OCO is the difference between OO minus OC. Pre-multiply by RC transpose is a, with respect to the camera frame. Now, let me take the time derivative of this. Here I have the product of this by this vector. So the time derivative is Rc transpose the derivative of this vector, which is time derivative of this minus the time derivative of this. What I should put here, what I should put as second element, is what? I should have rc dot transpose multiplied by this, OK? Because here I have this element by the time derivative of this. that like this is the standard derivative for the product sub two quantities. What you can prove and if you have the size of what I give you all the suggestions is that these terms, which is this, this is actually equal to the element that you have here. What is this element? is the skew symmetric matrix of being over this vector multiplied by Rc transpose over C how to prove this part use all these properties we can exercise for you what to do it is just a matter use this relation Okay. Okay, we reached this point. We reached this point. Which actually I like. Actually starts to like it. Because notice that I have here Rc transpose Omega C because now remember that I want to write as a function of this quantity. If you look here, beside here I have exactly this and this, here I have this. So notice that I'm rewriting the elements that I had in the first derivation using the information of these two variables. Okay? Let's move on to other steps. And in particular, loop. Exploiting all this relation, I can rewrite this vector. Remember that we started from this vector. I can rewrite this exploiting all the relation that will be appear exactly in this way. Because notice that this vector is written in this way. Sorry, this is actually these minus these plus the first block of this matrix by this because notice if you compute this product, you have exactly S by this, which is this. Okay? This difference is simple to be computed because this is actually this vector minus these, here you have 0,0, which provides U0. So it's just to convince you that the fact that these two or can be written as ugly. Okay, why I like these handwriting? That means one more element that brings us closer to the solution. Here you have this vector. We can assume that this vector has been multiply by the identity matrix. Okay? Why? Because I want to plug together these block with this block, because the vector that I have here is the same. And by observing this, what you have is that the PCO velocity can be rewritten exactly in this way. It's just standard algebra if you look for the steps, doesn't it? Shouldn't take too much time. But the loop that the expression that they are getting particular, look at that. Of course, what is this vector? Is it? VOC, the absolute value of the object with respect to the camera. And what is now this vector? is the absolute velocity of the camera with respect to the camera. Okay? So I have reached an important result, which is the following. So what you can write here is, that's the right, they're almost at the end. Here we can write that vc0 is equal to this velocity, which is this, which is voc, plus here I have a matrix that I call gamma, multiplied by this velocity, which is vcc. DCC. Okay? Gamma is these 2x2 block matrices, okay? Which is exactly what I have written here. Of course, gamma, this matrix depends on the vector OC, OC, which is the vector of joining the original camera frame to the original of the object frame, pre-temp with respect to the camera frame. OK? Perfect. Good. Let's do the last step for K8. and we need some truth in that. This is the direction from which I started, right? S dot equal to d is the order by this velocity. Now what we do is to replace this velocity with this expression. So in doing that, now I'm rewriting S dot as a function of these two absolute velocities, OK? Then I will take U1, leave that. If you replace, you get this relation S dot is equal to J s B O C plus L s V C C, where L s is nothing but the product between J s and these gamma matrix. Just replace to the calculation, you get this. The matrix J ds multiplied by the matrix gamma is called the interaction matrix. OK? And really often in practice, is simpler to compute this matrix like the D-image Jacobian. Typically what people do is to compute the interaction matrix and then find a version of this relation to build the image Jacobian. OK? But the interaction matrix has also an extremely interesting interpretation, which is the following. Suppose that the object is not moving, okay? Which is a reasonable case as discussed previously. The object is there, stuck, motionless. What is the absolute velocity of the object? Is equal to zero. And if I'm writing that the velocity of the object with respect to the camera frame is equal to zero, a vector which is null, in any frame is equal to 0. OK? So I have that the VOC velocity is equal to 0. OK? Which means that you don't have this term. So in the case, which is an extremely realistic case, the object is not moving. It's motionless. So this term is equal to 0. interaction matrix actually is the one that provides me the relation that I have between the S dot velocity, which is the velocity that I have for the future vector within this plane, and the absolute, yes, the absolute velocity of the camera expressed in the camera frame, okay? As I said, computing this interaction matrix is doable. And I will show you some example next Tuesday, OK? I'm introducing these concepts, and I will tell you on Tuesday, on a simple example, how we can compute them. Because these matrices are the ones which are important when we want to design a control where we measure the error directly in the image plane. So if we want to do the image based visual sampling, we need to have the knowledge of these quantities as we will appreciate next tutorial. So just a comment to conclude. I told you that computing this is not difficult. We will see why. You will exploit from a different point of view what is the return here. Then if you know this, you can compute this by inversion. Are we sure that the gamma is always invertible? Let's go back to the gamma structure. Is this matrix invertible? Are we sure? What are the gain values of this matrix? First of all, how many gain values does the matrix gamma is a six by six matrix. So how many eigenvalues? Six. And do eigenvalues are equal to minus 1. So for sure it's invertible. Okay. Since we don't meet tomorrow, have a nice weekend and let's meet next. Thank you.