 Professor Lombardo, English Bachelor of Science, Lausanne University, Liguria, France We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. We're all about the same. Okay, let's start. The last two lectures. So today we talk about something We have a useful problem which is, I would say, quite used to practice in real applications, a technique to deal with a situation where the robot is interacting with the environment. What is the main idea behind that? What we do is that we try to impose a design dynamic VAU about an interaction that we have between the independent factor and the environment. In particular, what we do is to impose that the interaction between the local and the environment is thought of as a second order differential equation. Why that? Because the second order differential equations are able to provide good approximations this is the procedure of several engineering problems that we've seen, at least the ones we are concerned with. And also, we know how to control the second-order system in a living way. What is a second-order system? It's a system where we have the mass, spring, and cutter. OK? So for sure you have seen this example in the first class of physics. But not only is it typical example that we analyze also view that the automatic problem class, okay. Where you can appreciate exactly that the denominator of transfer function is exactly the same as the denominator, okay? Let's say that, just a comment, it works pretty well in this situation where you want to keep the contact force typically quite small. So let's say it's working in a reasonable way in all those applications. Where the velocity of the factor 1 interacting with the environment is not so high. We see a couple of examples. OK. OK. I will say, skip this. Let me go straight to the technical details. You don't need to blame me. OK? Let me just start with a summary of what we have seen. The notation is different from the one that we have always introduced. I'm using the formalist by drawing the robot, but nothing particularly dramatic. OK? N is the inertia, x is the Fourier matrix the rest is equal. Notice, I am using just a simplified version of the model, just to give the situation a little bit easier, especially from the location of one component, so I am neglecting the presence of the three chocks, okay? Here, notice that we have exactly the term, which tells us that the robot is interacting with the other one. Okay? So you are the torque that we apply to the joint. Capital F, here, is the set of forces and torques. So in general, it's a 6th dimensional vector where we have the linear forces and torques which are applied directly to that vector. And we know, remember, that in this class we discussed how to model these contribution of forces and torques that we have to the end-effector at the joint level. Because here we are writing the model of the joint level. This capital F is something which is applied to the end-effector. We need to understand what is the corresponding contribution that we see at the joint level. Okay? So we have seen that the map is given by primitive planning. By the transform of the geometric region of the map. Is that okay? Something that we have seen in the static content of this case. Just one more moment to review something that we have already analyzed together. Here, so capital F are the forces applied to that And the fractal, we have the linear force, the torques. OK? These forces, when we write them in this way, are performing work on the velocities of the fractal, where, of course, the linear velocity is the linear velocity of that fractal. That we can even describe as V or V dot. OK? but remember that concerning the velocities related to the orientation here we have the angular velocity. Okay? The reason of that is that here I'm using the geometric Jacobian. Okay? When I have the geometric Jacobian, means that I'm referring to the speed related to the change of orientation the two times of angular velocity, which of course, remember, we already stress several times the fact that these velocities are different from this set of velocities, where here the velocity is actually the time derivative of triplet of u-laden angles, OK? But if you remember, we did a relation between omega and v dot. we need these matrix and we use exactly the relation between these two velocities. And remember that if you express the velocity in which the orientation change by time derivative of three-dimensional Euler angles, here you have an elliptic hexagon rather than the geodesic hexagon, okay? But there is a stronger relation between the two properties, okay? Because we know that the negative azirachian is equal to a suitable matrix, T, OK? That would be the line, which makes it into this glass, multiplied by the geometric zirachian, which means that there are these two relations between the two sets of velocities. OK. I told this story because you might desire here, instead of having the two forces F, you would like to have a representation of this quantity in terms of the elliptical Jacobian. This will be useful in the next slide. But it's not a problem because what we need is, is to just substitute the J transpose F with the J A that I'm giving as a common transpose multiplied by F A, where F A is just this transformation of the force F. So now we have the forces F, which perform work on this representation of the velocity design and effect. FA are the generalized forces which actually performance the work of the representation of velocity of the angle vector that we have here where in place of the angular velocity vector we have the time derivative of the triplet of the vectors. Okay? They are completely equivalent. but we spent almost an entire lecture, an entire lecture, to derive the dynamic model of our system, instead of looking at the dynamical model from the joint space contour, if you remember we derived the model from the operation space contour. Why this? Because I motivated this fact, telling you where we have the robot interacting with the partner, we look the model from the perspective of end effect, so this is the end effect of the part of the robot interacting with the partner. And so it is convenient to rewrite the previous model as a model which is actually seen from the relational space that, and assuming that the number of 20 is this kind of this model where we use issues, issues and issues the gravitational contribution term. Notice that here, we are looking at the Hoppian and the expression modulating the true inertia, the true gravitational contribution of the true centrifugal Fourier effects. And so, we did a bit of calculations reaching exactly this expression. So we were able to rewrite the model in a similar way. Well, here instead of having Q dot dot, we have X dot dot. OK? Here we have X dot in place of Q dot. And so on. But let's, you look here, what are the forces. Of course, I cannot have any more U. U are the forces which are applying to the joint. In place of U, I have to write what is the contribution of the application of the torques forces at the joint level into the corresponding forces that I see at that direction of that. And what I need to do is to pre-multiply this quantity exactly by the inverse of the definition of the approximation. OK? And so actually these are the forces that I see in the operational space which are due to the fact that I number line The sources that are using are the uses. The situation is horrible, you did this room! Extremely horrible. Extremely horrible. What do we do? Let's suffer, let's continue. Yes, I don't see any other solution. There are worse things to do. Are you following me at least so far? I have just re-written the joint space model in the Cartesian space. OK? While in place of Q I have x. What is x? What is x? Nobody knows. Nobody knows, why not? Six elements. The first three. The vector describing the position of the origin of the frame attached to the other frame. and concerning the second triplet you learn describing what the orientation of the frame does to the other triangle now you are not going to forget anything, right? good ok, let's go higher let's go higher let's design the control law OK? Let me write a little more. But de-forget the argument of the matrices, OK? Just to keep the notation shorter. Okay. We are going to use a feedback linearization strategy that we are going to use in order to implement our controller. Let's first of all, try to understand what is the U that I have to implement and in order to add by the end the dynamics of my variable x rule by these equations. A is the usual auxiliary control law, so I design U as a function of A, such that that by applying this U, by the end, the relation between x and A is given by a double integrand. What is the U? Such that if I apply this U and get this relation, I use this idea of Big Bang Generalization that we have already seen. Then, this is just the first step. The second step that I'm going to implement is how to design A in such a way that the relation between robot and environment is given by a proper set of law that is differential equation. Let's leave this second part. OK, first of all, let's concentrate on this. Okay. Look, the idea is that the design. You, first of all, let me put the GTA transpose. Why? Because when I apply U, if I multiply this matrix by this, they cancel with each other, okay? So I'm left with identity. So let's multiply this matrix. that allows me to get rid of this. Okay. Then I need to cancel this, this and this. Okay. So inside what I do is to put for sure s x x dot plus gx mind yourself. Hey, Suppose that you implement just this element should be clear that this cancels with this. Okay? These elements eliminates these, Gx eliminates this, minus Fa eliminates this term. But what I want to reach is this, x dot dot equal to a. So what I do is to add this arg on the sides. Here I also have ma. mxa. Okay? Because implementing this, by the end you have the equality between this and this, which implies that x dot, dot, is exactly equal to L. OK? So if you want to, if you don't believe, try to substitute in place of U in this, the angle system, in place of U in that expression, what do you get? But the L is an agreement. I try to be more constructive, okay? Instead of just telling you this is it. Okay? Okay, now, the second step is exactly do exactly in such a way that the behavior of the robot with respect to the environment is described by a second order differential equation Which means basically to where the mass double and is stronger. Where, notice, that the degrees of freedom that are yet inside the separation is exactly the design inertia, to design damping, to design stiffness. and the design trajectory that I'm going to form. So you have a trajectory which is assigned to you, which is x dot, x dot, xB, sorry, xB dot, xB dot, and you want that the dynamics of your system the reason of this differential equation. And I will come back, on this. Let's first of all, address the technical part. So how to design A in such a way that by the end, the dynamics of your system is ruled by this differential equation. Then I will try to motivate why this is a good choice. is a good choice for reaching some particular task. OK? But first of all, let's address this technical element. How to design a game in such a way that the dynamics of my system satisfy exactly these dynamics? OK? Notice that this is a second order system. The mass basically plays the role of the inertia, is exactly related, notice, to the acceleration. The damper is related to the velocity, OK, when you are in a second-order system. Typically, a damper can be seen as a viscous friction, OK, that we know it is proportional exactly to the velocity. the stiffness refers instead to the position remember the meaning of the stiffness of the spring depends exactly on the difference between the rest of the position and current position here we have again the thermal forces of the environment that notice we have also here But now, let's address this problem. How to design A in such a way that I get this second-order differential equation? Actually, this is not so difficult because what you do is just to design A in this way. xB dot, dot, plus m, m inverse, plus this. If you want, we can try together to verify that it we design named such a way we get exactly this impedance model. So x dot dot equal to xd dot dot plus N inverse which multiplies all this stuff. What do we do is to bring xd dot dot on this side. we pre-multiply both sides now by m. So you have m x dot dot minus x v dot dot equal to this element. That was the other side here. If you bring this duodenum on the other side and you change the sliding side, here you get exactly this expression. Okay? It's not difficult, of course, to follow these technical details. Okay, okay. Let's discuss this part, because here we have four elements that we need to design. the inertia M, the stiffness K, and the dump D. And not only, also the desired trajectory. Let's consider this example that, in my opinion, is quite clear. Suppose that you want to run with your robot over some metallic surface. surface ok so what you do here is to assign a desired trajectory which is a bit below a bit inside the material why that? because when the robot try to reach the desired trajectory of course it is dealing with the stiffness So actually the robot is not reaching exactly the design trajectory it was taught. Before then, it tried in many cases to follow the desired trajectory. The behavior is exactly described by this differential equation. So let's try to reason together. I expect that if the environment that I'm going to interact with is really stiff, what I need to do is I respect the design. These must be bigger and these can be more as the skin. Maybe I can anticipate with this slide. to understand better. When the robot is approaching the surface, so along those directions you envision to have the contact with the environment, what you do is design a big inertia and a small stiffness. Let's just concentrate on inertia and stiffness. Why the large mass? Because in this way, you have small acceleration, OK? And why small kn? Because in this way, you have small forces due to the stiffness of the body. OK, so there are elements here, m and k, are designed based on the experience, based on the knowledge of the task that you want to achieve. Suppose that for instance, that the goal that you have to achieve is to remove some material from the surface, ok? So what do you do also in this case? To assign a trajectory which is a bit inside the material, ok? And then you try to modulate mass and stiffness according to the knowledge that you have about the material for instance. Over which you have to remove the material. Okay? This is the rule of thumb which I use in practice to design all these degrees of freedom that we have. Typically it's the experience of the worker that guides this procedure. It is also true that one of these days when we use learning to solve everything, what you can do that is actually is done is to try to learn the specifics of the material in such a way to provide also an adaptive rule to design of these parameters. But the idea is exactly this. This is a concern with respect to the direction where you think you have the contact. Instead, if you take those directions where you don't envision to have contact, so these are three directions, what you can do is design a large stiffness, Small inertia, so in this case the acceleration by which you are acting are quite good. You have a good tracking of the trajectory along those directions. And where the motion is free. Which actually is what you want to achieve. This is the sense of a way by which you can design exactly the components of the inertia matrix and the stiffness of the model. Okay. Let's go back. Just the comment, notice that in order to implement the two steps that we have here, linearization, in the case where you use the dynamic continuous model, what we need to know here is the force f3. This can be measured directly if you have some sensor, force sensor. OK? So there are, you can buy some force sensors. If you want to have accurate force sensors, money, you have to accept that the accuracy is not typically so good. Or there are other techniques that allows you to infer an approximation, approximate the knowledge on that field, measuring other quantities, okay? There are techniques that is called soft sensor that That measuring some quantities allows you to infer the knowledge of other quantities that are correlated with one another. And there are several techniques that allow to estimate these forces. Okay, my opinion in any case to understand the behavior of the controller, consider exactly this example when you want to write over dynamic subtrace, what you do is to assign this line trajectory, which is slightly inside the material. And then you evaluate the knowledge of mass stiffness according to a priori knowledge of the material and so on. And the template is used to improve the performance of this system. So the students in Control System Engineering should have perceived in the control lab the fact that the damping term is particularly useful also to improve the transient performance, OK, to reduce the presence of overshoot, the rising time, and the delay to reach the final position, and so on. OK? OK. We can skip this slide. We'll keep it to more than here. It's after that, but I think we're using the last set of slides. Let me be a bit shorter. Both today and tomorrow. Okay. I want to discuss another case with you, just two more. As I said, this strategy is called impedance control. So it's called impedance control because what we do is exactly to improve that the relation between the robot and the environment is ruled by this model, which is called impedance model. OK? One of my previous PhD students now is exactly developing strategy for real application where you adapt one working the value of the design inertia, design backing, and design stiffness. Okay? Is a one running algorithm you try from the data that you get to improve your system base exactly on the data. Yeah? The inertia of the state of the matrix, it depends on the material you're working on. It depends on the material? Oh yeah, yeah, of course. Is there no way to find the connection between like material and the matrices? I think that in some cases this is possible, yeah. Is there like a joint modulus or something like that to... Yeah, yeah, for sure there are. I'm not working directly on this problem in my research, research, so but one of my PhD students is working a lot for improving the current algorithms. The current algorithms works well because typically what you do is to use a human-like behavior. If you know that moving in a wrong direction, there is an obstacle for instance, suppose that you are blind, but you know that there is an obstacle. What you do is to move slowly. Okay? So the idea is quite similar, okay, in order to avoid that you just throw something. But the idea is less improvement is being used, okay? Let's say that the strategy that you're using, as I just told you, is not quite conservative because they leave it in any way, the velocity is not at all. But, for sure, there are variations, and there will be, for sure, some literature about that. Okay, another example which is important here is the gridding task. Like here, you see this phase. You provide the same trajectory which is inside. Here you have the full knowledge of the material so you can have a good guess about the matrices. Typically, they are diagonal because in this way you can account for the different direction, okay? Let me just conclude, let's consider the case where x B is constant which means that the x B dot x B dot dot dot are both equal to 0. If you take the previous control law and If you take the previous control law, you substitute this element equal to 0, you get this controller. Ok, it is just a matter of substituting inside there. Look, what is this controller? This controller is exactly the gravity of the VD, controller with gravity compensation. Here we have the term which compensates for the gravity. OK. Here, notice that what we have is a proportional term. OK, this is the position arrow, multiply by again. And here, this is the velocity arrow. Notice that I didn't report x below. Just use it as a point of zero. But this is a velocity arrow. So it is a PD controller, which is modulated, of course, by the Ehrlich-Hitler project. Because here, in this case. distance is dot dimension at the joint level, is measured in the Cartesian space. So you have to translate it in the joint space by pre-multiplying by the transpose of the element that's a problem, of course. And notice that this is the controller I did specify, sorry. Not only I have this assumption, but assuming also that f h is equal to 0. So this is the controller that I'm design in the case where I'm not interacting with the environment. Okay, is basically we recover the controller that we have already implemented, but let's now include the presence of the interaction force with the environment. Okay. So suppose that that thing is different from 0. What do you expect? that we are able to reach the desired position xd. So suppose that you have a table xd is a point inside the table where the robot is going there. Of course, we cannot expand the convergence to xd, okay? But in this case, we can use some calculations to understand what is the model that we have reached, okay? There is a typical model, which is used to model the contact of the robot with the environment, which is an elastic model like this. Typically, we model the force that the environment exerts on the robot as a spring. We know that the spring, you have the rest position of the spring. And as soon as the spring is not in the rest condition, we have that the spring is exerting a force. The size of the force depends on the displacement. OK. So typically, the interaction force has the least model as in the elastic force, where kl is the stiffness of the spring. OK? you have the spring, and C is the rest position. And so if we assume that this is exactly the force exerted by the environment, what you can do is you take this one. And to substitute the application of the control U inside your dynamical model, remember that we want to compute the equilibrium point. So, the equilibrium point means that this is a point where all the velocities of acceleration are equal to zero. So, you have a lot of elements which cancel out. You do all the calculations, and what you get is just a 2x2 dissertation. And I skip all the details. in this situation where, for instance, you have this table, you have a design point inside the table, you have the robots who want to go there. In this situation, you can, quite freely, put this table in the point that you're using exactly. It's as much. Okay. Just a comment about the impedance control, which is another kind of controller that you can see in practice. So the impedance control try to assign a behavior in between the end factor and the end value. What we want to do is to track this mass down the spring. This is second order theory. This is the idea. The impedance control, what you do is to design exactly the torque field. In the unlimited control, what we do is something different. Because do you remember when I introduce the kinematic controller? I told you that there are robots that when you bind these robots, you don't have access to the low level controller. So you don't have access directly to the controller. What you do is you just assign velocities which are tracked by the controller. Ok? And, I explain you that this controller is working in a good way because there is a low-level controller which is super fast in tracking the desired velocity that you have assigned, ok? It is able to calculate the torques that you have to apply to the robot and is doing this in a really fast way that if your requirements are within the bandwidth of the system, you can track almost perfectly the design velocity. Okay, let's go back again to this scenario. The impedance control is exactly a kind of impedance control that we have in the scenario where we don't have access to the low level control, and what we do, also in this case, to assign the profile of velocities to be tracked. OK? There is this kind of parallelism with respect to what we have seen when we introduced the kinematic control. OK. More or less, the situation is like this. What time is it? 2 o'clock. 2 o'clock. Let's do another half an hour and then let's conclude. Do you want to have the break? Break. Breaker. Who wants the breaker? Who does not want the breaker to finish before 7 o'clock? Let's have the breakers, no? Next group, do them together. Okay. Okay. Last but not least, I have no slides. Yeah. I suggest that you use the topic and tomorrow we conclude, ok? This is due for the final exam, ok? So I'm gonna conclude something that I like. Then you can take your course. Ok. We are in the situation where we have this interaction between robot and environment and environment is constraining the possible motion of the robot. OK, what we do here, now, is to introduce two sets. Artificial constraints and natural constraints, OK? They are associated to some a geometric elements of the road. So what are, let's do today just this. Let me introduce the two sides of constraints. And then we consider an example, okay? Which allows us to make a concrete these definitions in my opinion to understand better. Okay? Let's do just this today, and tomorrow possibly we see because I have just one. Tomorrow you see the second one, it's also a way to review again this definition and then we see how we can explore this new sense of constraints and design. Okay? Okay. Just a thought, this is important, that the two sides that I'm going to are designing the hidden conditions, OK? Where we assume that there are no frictions, stuff like that. OK. And what we need to do is also to introduce a new task for management. But let me just stress that even though, is there any problem? Yes, there are problems. but I think that they are not correlated with the robotics in any variety. So even if you want to solve the problem, or let's discuss it in the discussion in the next meeting. The good news is that we designed a theory of fusion. But since by the end we designed a feedback strategy, People have seen in practice that all the non-ideal conditions. The fact that the surfaces are not completely compliant. We have friction, we have some errors. All these non-ideal elements are compensated by the feedback. So let's design our strategy directly in the ideal conditions, keeping in mind, that anyway, when tomorrow we design the controller, we will have a feedback component, which is extremely good in getting rid of all the un-deluxe. Okay. Let's start by introducing the first set of constraints, meaning the definition will be a bit foggy to this set of terms. And through an example, we will try to make them more concrete. Okay? Okay, the situation is a robot environment that are perfectly rigid. So if you with this differ, contact is without any frictions. Okay. Let me see if I have a. We need, we should have the help of a student. Here we have two clouds. Okay, which is a linear representation of the robot They are in contact, supposing this point. And what we do is to assign a new reference frame. A new reference frame whose origin is exactly this contact point. And then you have three axes. OK? Along each axis, we can translate, we can rotate around this axis, okay? This motivates the presence of, suppose that this is a z axis, you can translate along you can have also a force at z line along this axis but you can have also a torque Okay? Which refers to this z axis So basically we have twelve quantities overall because we have four quantities which refers to each axis, okay? Linear velocity, angular velocity and so we have two components related to velocities, okay? And we have two components related to force, linear force and torque, okay? So overall we have two L quantities. Okay, what we include inside the natural constraints are the following directions. Basically here we put all the directions along which the motion is freed. Ok? Here we say that these are six minus ten. Ok, when I talk here about the directions, I am referring to the direction related to the velocities. Ok? So since I have three axes, right? And we have two elements related to velocities. For each axis, over all the possible, let's say, directions for velocities are 6. OK? Then I have a sixth direction for forces and torques. OK? Suppose that the constraints that you have in your system Constrain the direction of your motion in 6 minus the directions. Okay? So you put all basically, the directions referring to both linear velocity or rotations along which or around which the motion is free. Okay? It's prohibited because along those directions, Basically, you have that your system reacts with some reaction forces. It does not allow the system to move along this direction. Then, I have a simple example that allows us to clarify all these definitions. But, this is not the only subset of directions that I put. I put another subset of direction that in this case refers to reaction forces and torques and here what I do is to put those directions along which I don't have forces and torques reaction. Okay, so why here I allocate a direction, because it should be clear that if the direction along which I cannot move Because the system is exacting over me, over the robot. In reaction forces are six minus k. Should be clear that in direction along which I have no forces or force of reaction of the environment of the system, the arc k. Okay. So basically we have these two subsets composing the natural constraints. Let's leave that. As I said, I have an example that clarifies easily this definition. The second set of constraints that we produce is called the artificial constraints. Please don't ask me why one set is natural and the other is artificial. I didn't understand it at the time. I asked those two friends of the patients but they didn't give me some expunct from the answer. So this is the name we need to assert. What we have here is, again, two subsets. The first subset here includes those directions along which we have possible physical velocities for the element vector. Actually, these are the directions along which the motion of the element vector can occur. Notice that it is the complementary set with respect to the previous one. In the natural constraints concerning the head effect of velocities, we include all those directions along which the motion was prohibited. Here instead, we put those directions along which the motion cannot go. But let me stress one more time. one more time when I talk about velocity direction, I refer to both linear velocities but also possible rotation. Instead concerning the contact forces I am talking about, what I put here, I put the 6 minus k directions where reactions of the environment can occur. Again, this subset is a complimentary with respect to the subset that we are in, the natural constraints, because remember that in the natural constraints, what we include was water. The directions along which no reaction forces or can be. They are exactly complementary. Let me discuss this example that allows us to see how to compute these artificial and and natural constraints, OK? The trick to make simple the definition of these constraints is the choice of the reference frame, OK? I told you now we include inside our analysis a new reference frame, OK? It's a reference frame which is exactly in the contact point between environment and the effector, okay? And what we would like to have is to have a reference frame which is expressing a really explicit way the possible direction along which I can rotate, I can translate, I can have a reaction force or non-reaction force, okay? Let's for instance consider this case where we have a cube that and slide along this guy, okay? So, if I wanted to introduce this reference frame that must be really expressing the directions along which I can move, not to move, I would say that it is natural to have one direction along the guy, right? one direction which is perpendicular in this direction, and others which is perpendicular in this direction. Right, since I can slide just in this direction let's put one axis over there and the other towards Octagonal. OK, I will say that it is a string image graph. We denote this reference frame as RFT I want to stress that of course, this reference frame is attached to the contact point in some sense between the end effector and the environment. So let's say that it is a frame which is time varied. It's changing over time, of course, since the end effector is new. Is the definition of the frame clear, everyone? I would say that it is extremely natural, right? Maybe you can put the style of x, you can put z, d, x and other, but what I want to stress that here this choice is extremely natural for the task that you will be doing on this guy ok? Ok, let's introduce both the artificial constraints and the natural constraints, ok? Let's start from the natural constraints we need let me go back to this position we need to include some directions referring to velocities and are those directions of which the motion is prohibited in terms of both linear movement and the rotation I need to include those directions along which there are no reaction forces. Okay? So let's keep in mind this. How many elements do I have to include? Six elements in the natural constraints, six elements in the artificial constraints. Okay? Let's discuss together the direction in terms of linear velocity and rotation, along which the motion is predicted. Can you move linearly along the y-axis? No. So this is the first suitable direction. So b1 is equal to 0, because I cannot move. So this is the first direction. What about b3? you might say that I can't go up. But of course, if I go up, it's not consistent with the task that I am considering. But notice anyway that I cannot go down. So this Z is another prohibited dimension. Actually, we are not that condition. Let's consider now the rotation. Can you rotate around Z? Can you rotate around x? No. Can you rotate around y? Yes. It's not prohibited. You might add that the cube is rolling instead of sliding. Right. So now what I am including is the X and the Z but not the... sorry, Omega X Omega Z but not Omega Y because I could roll instead of sliding. Actually Omega Y is a kind of desire quantity quantity that I will design, since I want to slide I will force omega y equal to 0. But I am imposing this behavior, ok, because I want to slide rather than rolling, ok? But notice for instance that omega x is equal to 0 because the mechanical structure of the the system is violating, is making it possible to rotate around x. So it's different in this equation, ok? In the previous case I forgot to mention that here we don't have dx. Why? Because actually since I can slide, dx is a possible direction that I can take for the you have the force. Is that okay? We have already four elements here, right? It means that in the second subset, which is the subset where I include what? I include those direction along which forces and torques, reaction forces and reaction torques, are absent. Okay? Okay. So essentially they are complementary, the two sides indeed. What I have here is fx because I don't have a linear reaction. I know this because I am assuming that there is no friction, no stuff and so on. But also, since I can roll around the y, I have also the torque M y, which is not present. Is that okay? Perfect. Now, what we do is to consider the artificial constraints. Okay? Perfect. Let's go back to the definition. It's always a good way to memorize things. Again, we have to do some setting, right? In the first subset, we need to include end effector velocities along- around- which for sorry yes we have those directions for that the vector velocities along which the motion can occur ok? and then we need to include those directions for forces and torques reaction forces and torques that can occur can occur when the robot interacts with the environment. So it's the dual case with respect to the previous one. OK. Let's now start with this. Here I have to include those directions for velocities along which the motion can occur. But we already know the answer, because we know that we can slide along the x-axis. So I have the x, and the x will have some desired value, is the velocity with which I want to slide along that axis. And then I have also omega y, is the angular velocity by which I can roll around y. But since in this case what I want to do is just to slide, not to roll, I have that omega y desire is equal to 0. OK? Here, notice that these quantities are the desired quantities that we want to see in order to reach exactly the desired bit. Let's consider the second subset in the artificial constraints in the second subset. Or first subset, it depends on what is the order. this was the first subset of this vector, red and red, the sun is actually 6 seconds of course. Green, green, also in this case the sun is 2. What do we include here concerning the reaction forces and torques directions are those directions along which these forces or torques can occur, can appear. OK? look of course I make a reaction force F1 because if you try to slide along one direction the environment is reacting with the force that will keep you there here F1 decides several times the desire value of F1 is equal to 0.1 because you don't want to stress the system of course There is no reason here to force the cube to slide along y. You are just stressing the system, OK? This is the first component. Then, since I cannot rotate around x, I have also the presence of an x. Also in this case, a typical distance I have is equal to 0. The same is true for nz. I can not rotate around on the z-axis, is what we get in the presence of m and z, which is also equally easy to denote with the psi vector. And then we have fz. Here the case of interest is the case where suppose that you want to slide the cube, exerting a desired force to the environment. in the case where you want to remove some material, stuff like that. Suppose that instead of having a cube, you have the tool which is designed to remove material. In this case, it's clear that you would like to exert some force in the environment in order to be able exactly to remove some amount of material. And here, you have the left side. This is the one to some desire. OK? So this concludes the introduction of these two sets, natural constraints and fission constraints. And before concluding, let me just introduce this parameterization. This is just a parameterization. It is defined this way. There is nothing to be understood. Nothing to be understood, OK? Um, so here I'm considering the components of V Omega for the natural constraints. I want to select just Vx Omega y, right? So let's introduce this parameterization which will be used tomorrow, design to control that. Since I want just to select omega x, omega y, basically what I want to have is just a vector just a vector where you have d x 0 0 0 omega y 0 just to select those components along which I can have the motion, okay? Now this is that if you do exactly this, let's take this 6 by 2 methods by this 2 dimensional vector, if you compute the product between this and this, what you get is exactly this vector. Okay. Let's accept this parabolic relation. Let's call this matrix equal to D. And actually, you can do the same for the forces and torques direction. Okay, these are the possible forces and torques reactions we can add this vector, OK? So we would like in this case to have a 6-dimensional vector. It is fy, actually 0, fy has z, and x 0, and z. How do we get this vector? You have this 6 by 4 matrix multiplied by these 4 elements. If you compute this product, you have this vector. And that's called is matrix equal to y, okay? Now guess what is the result of computing Why? If you compute this product, what is the result? What is the result? They are mutually orthogonal in the directions, right? If you do the calculations what you get is exactly 0. Okay? You can also consider the inverse. y is opposite... Why that? Here, basically, the motivation is behind this physical fact that the reaction forces are always perpendicular to the physical direction of the motion, ok? Due to this fact, the reaction forces are never producing work along the feasible direction of motion. Ok? So, basically inside of this product of these two matrices, I'm incorporating exactly this kind of product between the reaction forces and the feasible velocities. OK, so since the reaction forces are not producing work along the physical directions, because the other component, we have the life-force structure. OK, let's stop here for today. Tomorrow we will start another example. This one, the task is to determine the crank. OK, we will introduce, also here, the natural and the artificial constraints and sets, just to see another example. And then we will see how this formalism is useful to design a controller to reach a design task. Let's meet tomorrow. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Oh, yeah. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. a a a a a a a a a a a All right, let's go. Let's go. OK. Let's go. What's up? What's up, everybody? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up? What's up?