 So let's start. Let us go straight to the end without the break. So yesterday I started to introduce the problem related to the image visual servo. So I tried to clarify that there are two ways the first one is based on the fact that you used the information from cameras to reconstruct the three-dimensional pose of the manipulator basically with respect to the wall. It's clear that once you have done this, what we can do is to implement directly what we have already seen in this class. Okay? This is the sense of this first procedure. okay every time I just try to create common background among everyone for the students taking also the computer vision class I guess that what I am going to show in this set of slides is perfectly normal ok? So you can switch off your brain and be normal The first part of the lecture ok? also because here I am just summarising elements not really huge details so what is a camera? A camera is a vision of shadow a vision of sight, ok, whose goal basically is that of measuring the intensity of the light which is reflected by an object There's people working. Ok, so the goal is to measure the intensity of light which is reflected by an object and to do that there is a photosensitive element which is called pixel, which is able to transform the light intensity into an electric vector. We know we have this pixel inside our camera and there are many other elements inside the camera. Let me just specify that there are a lot of electronics which have to perform the manipulation of these signals, but in particular there is this element, this lens, whose goal is exactly that of focusing the light which is reflected by the object on the plane which is called Image plane is the plane where we have all the pixels so the goal of the lens is exactly that of reflecting the light on this plane and this motivates the fact that what we need is a model about the lens I don't know if optics is still taught during physics too, maybe not, you don't study the models of these elements during physics but I guess you have seen them during the computer vision class, it's a quite standard model so just a few elements for the ones not taken in the computer vision class here we have our lens this is the model for the film lens camera model so here you can see that we have the optical axis which is the one perpendicular exactly to the lens, passing through the center of the lens the rays which are parallel to the to the optical axis ok they are deflected through the lens when they pass through the lens they are deflected through a point ok, which is here which is located a distance lambda from the lens and this distance is called the focal length ok so they are deflected they all pass through this point and then they reach If you have another ray here, it does this. Instead, the rays which pass through the optical center, which is denoted by the letter O, are not reflected, they go straight. Okay? What is the fundamental equation which is the basis of the model of the hill and is the one I reported in the slide. Let's associate the two vectors. . Sub physical. Okay? Capital Z is basically the distance between the point that we are considering here with respect to the length. Okay, so capital Z is exactly the distance that we have here, okay? Lambda, I already mentioned is lambda. Lambda is exactly the focal length. Okay? And then we have small z, so this is capital Z. Small z. Small z is the distance of the image plane with respect to the lengths. Okay? And then we have this fundamental relation of 1 over Z plus 1 over small z is equal to 1 over length. This is the classical model of the thing. Okay? Let's hang a little more into the details of what do we mean, okay? So let's look together at the slide what are the elements that we have here so what you have to imagine in your mind is that here we have the lens okay? this is the center of the lens this is the optical axis suppose that you have a reference frame which is attached to the lens Okay? And we have if the volume now is 0 , then the video is without volume, right? Okay. So OC, which is the center of the lens, is also the region of the frame. ZC is along the optical axis. Okay. xc, yc, are exactly on the plane on which we have the lens, okay? Is that clear? So this is the reference frame attached to the lens that we can assume to be the reference frame attached to the camera, okay? Is the reason why we called it for the C, the subscript C stands for camera then here somewhere we have the base reference frame then at a distance f of the focal length from the lens, we have the image plane and then we will discuss also the reference frame which is attached to the image plane What is E.C.V according to the standard notation that we have used in this class is refers to the homogeneous transformation that we have between the camera frame and the base frame ok? Now suppose that we have a point here located in the space and this point B you can refer the coordinates both with respect to the base frame both with respect to the counter frame of course when we write PXC PYC PZC what we mean is that we are describing the coordinates of this point with respect to the counter frame so let's exactly consider this point PC, when I write P with a subscript C I mean that I'm describing coordinates that are of the camera frame, you know that we have this resolution, okay? So what do we do is take the homogeneous representation of the coordinates, which means that to add the fourth coordinate, which is equal to 1. So we can write that PC tilde is equal to the matrix PC multiplied by P tilde. P tilde here does not have the subscript, which means that I am describing the coordinates with respect to the base. Is that OK? OK. So basically P is the position of the point with respect to the base. What we would like now to understand is what are the coordinates that we have here, the image plane of the point that we are at of course, I forgot to say, actually yes, I told you, let's go back again to this image there is that, so let's pick the point P ok, that is the point P in the next slide. The rays which are parallel to the optical axis are reflected, they pass through this point, which is a distance lambda which is the focal length, then they cross the image plane the point that we have here, the rays that starting from P pass through the optical center of all they are not deflected but of course these rays these rays cross in the same point here okay in deriving the fundamental relation you have to keep in mind this fact the reason using this fact you can exactly prove the validity of this relation anyway let's add also in our slide one additional ingredient which is the reference plane on the image plane ok this case since I have just a plane and I'm introducing just the x and the y coordinates ok so the axis x and y of this frame attach on the image plane are axes which are parallel to xc and yc respectively Why the origin of the frame that I'm looking here on the image plane is the result that we have between the intersection of the vertical axis with this image plane? So here we have the origin. Is that okay? Let's take our point P, let's project it into the image plane, which means let's consider, for instance, the ray which pass starting from the point B which pass passes through the origin of the camera frame which is the origin attached to the lens let's cross the screen work out the coordinates of this crossing point that I denote by Xf, Yf Okay? So it's not difficult at all to compute this, this is just a matter of considering the similarities between proper triangles, okay? And if you consider these similarities between proper triangles, what you get out of it are exactly the coordinates x, xf yf, okay? which are the ones that are so we have that xf is equal to minus f, dxc is divided by Tzc, yf is equal to minus f Tyc over Tzc. From this derivations we can immediately understand an important property that we have with the creation of images that I'm losing the information about the depth of the scene because in computing xf yf what matters is just the ratio between in the case of xf between pyc and pzc and considering yf the ratio between pyc and pzc all the points which have the same ratio projected of course all on the same point in the image plane, and what are these points? They are all the points which are located in this line. Okay? Pick another point, for instance here, this point is projected exactly on the same point in the image plane. So this is the meaning of the fact that in this case we are losing information about the depth of the sea. Okay? Any question? So notice that there is the sign minus is quite evident from the image that if we keep x and y parallel to xz, yz actually the sign here are negative and this is the result of the fact that the image is reflected on the other side okay, but there is a way mathematically speaking to get rid of this let's go here, of this minus sign instead of having the image plane focal length beyond the lens what we can assume is to have the image plane in front of distance of focal length equal to F and here you have the same elevation of the other ones okay? Of course, there is a problem if Pz,c is equal to zero which means that you have a point which is over the plane Xc,Yc. xz, yz if you have a point here in the plane and you draw the line passing through the original c of course this line will stay entirely on the plane xz,yz and this line will be parallel to the plane so there is no crossing point this is a fact that the perspective transformation So the relation that provides us this coordinate xF, yF is called the Ritter-Jouffert perspective transformation. And we say that this perspective transformation is singular when it's the series quantity. Okay?

 So for the students taking the computer vision for sure. We need to consider the fact that actually our image is quantized is quantized according to the pixels. So, the numbers that we have as coordinates in reality when we consider the image plane are not continuous numbers, okay? So, to consider this fact we introduce the coordinates in terms of pixels that we denote by XI-YI okay? To do that What we do is to scale the coordinates that we computed in the previous case by rule scaling factor which accounts for the dimension of the pixels So alpha x, alpha y which dictates exactly what is the pixel over which I am and now this time in the equations we have also a offset x0, y0, y0 because typically when you have your image plane we don't have the axis exactly centered here. okay but typically, one possible choice is to have the origin of the frame in one of the corners typically, if I remember well, it's this corner, right? And you have the axis like this so at 0.0 I have there to account for this part, okay? ok so we introduce these pixel coordinates which are defined with respect to the reference frame which is located differently from with respect to the one that I have introduced previously ok? ok let's make another I would say it's more a mathematical transformation just to transform this non-linear relation into a linear equation which makes our future calculations a bit easier, ok? And in order to rewrite this expression which is nonlinear into a linear expression What we do is to introduce the homogeneous representation of our point. So instead of considering Xy yi where x and y are coordinates in the image plane of the pixel coordinates, we introduced the homogeneous characterization of the point introducing also a third coordinate, which is Z hat. Notice that here X, Y, Z are small, here are capital. And basically, the derivation that we use is the following one. Xi is equal to Xi, small x i over lambda, capital Y i is equal to small y i over lambda, lambda is greater than 0. We will see that lambda is exactly the z coordinate of the point that we are considering. Okay? So let's look at the relation that we have here. And let's suppose that small zi is exactly lambda. What I want to justify here is that this relation can be re-written exactly in this way. Where basically lambda is the pair pz, c coordinate. Basically in semi-lambda we have the knowledge of the depth of the scene. And the relation that you see written here, let's consider this, okay? We have this sigma matrix, which is the one reported here. we have alpha f alpha x, f alpha y, x zero, y zero, one and notice that inside of the matrix gamma we have the so-called intrinsic parameters of the camera Okay, because we have the size of the pixel, we have the focal length we have the elements including the bias or the origin while the matrix capital by is just 3 by 4 matrix. Okay? Where the first block identity of the last one is equal to 0. But let's justify that. Ensure that we have to get difficult to verify that. Because when you multiply sigma by pi, What you get is, first of all, is a matrix which is three by four. We have a matrix three by three by matrix three by four, is a matrix which is three by four. What do you get? F Alpha X zero, zero, zero. actually sorry, here we have f alpha x, 0 here and x is 0 and 0 of course. Then the second row we have 0, f alpha y, y 0, 0 and 0, 0, 0, 0, 0. Okay? That if you multiply these by this vector, which is four-dimensional. This is a homogeneous representation of the point P with respect to X frame, what you get yes it's correct let me write over here will justify the validity. When you perform the multiplication of this matrix by what you get is exactly alpha f alpha x by p x, c. The first component plus x0. for the second is f YY, YC, plus Y0, YC, if the third one is exactly So this is what you get here on the right hand side, notice that the memory, the definition of XI, YI, that we have here, you have exactly the equality as soon as you have that lambda is equal to this coordinates So this is the reason why when we consider the homogeneous representation of the points that we have in pixel coordinates, in some sense we are considering all the points that can be projected directly into that point this is the reason why inside the lambda we have exactly the third coordinate of our orbit and we go back to the image here, the third coordinate of this point which is exactly the one related to the depth of this anyway we have this relation which in some sense transforms this non-linear representation is something which is linear and which is more useful for later use ok? if you will see in the next set of slides but anyway, where I want to come with this variation is remember this variation from which we started we have other point P we can describe this point P with respect to the camera frame we have these coordinates we can consider the coordinates of the point with respect to the basic frame we know that we have this relation with respect to the sets of coordinates this is the relation that I have just written ok and plugging together the two relations which means that what we do is to substitute this vector which is pt de C with a vector pt C pt de What you get is a description is the description that we have here is lambda x i y i 1 is equal to what? Sigma pi pbc and that dot pb there and this matrix is an important matrix as most of you know which is called the camera calibration matrix okay uh notice that we have two sets of information inside this camera calibration matrix in the first matrix which is the the sigma matrix is the one I have introduced previously here We are in formation which is intrinsic to our camera Because we have the size of the pixel, we have the focal length, we have this bias from the origin of the frame attached to the camera, with respect to which we count pixel co-ordinates, ok? we have the so-called intrinsic parameters inside this matrix instead we have the intrinsic parameters because inside this matrix we have the information that provides us the relative pose of the camera with respect to the base frame okay? and so you have seen that there are several strategies that you can use in order to reconstruct the information that you have inside okay what we focus on in the second part of the lecture I don't think we have the time to conclude what we want to show you is a summary of the methods to reconstruct this matrix assuming that you have the perfect knowledge of these intrinsic parameters will we see some ways that allows us to reconstruct these intrinsic parameters But we will return to these later Last point last point is this one its the last definition but actually is the kind of coordinates that we will use in designing our controllers and our analytical in order to compute the relative positive camera and the base are the so-called normalized coordinates okay? The normalized coordinates actually is similar to introduced in this way coincides exactly with the coordinates xf yf okay? So let's go back to the coordinates that we have in the image plane through the perspective transformation. So what do we do? Suppose you have the image plane in front of the lens, not behind. Lets take a projected this point in the image plane, the coordinates that you have xf, yf without the sign minus the normalized coordinates, are the coordinates you have assuming that the local fact length, focal length is equal to one. Okay? So in the case f is equal to one, you have that x, y is normalized coordinates coincide exactly with xf, yf. I explain to you through this way because he's a bit more pictorial speaking in my opinion a bit easier to understand the definition but the proper definition would be the one which is reported here are the coordinates x, y such that his relation is true and as a consequence of what is written there you have the fact that x and y would coincide with xf and yf is equal to one. Starting from the definition, which is reported here, because this equation is the following actually when I have my image plane what I measure are the xi-yi co-ordinates, the pixel co-ordinates, okay? And I would like you to understand what is the relation between the xi-yi co-ordinates with respect to this normalized co-ordinates, okay? But if this is the relation the normalized coordinates for Kv Remembering this relation that we have seen just few slides ago and if you look the definition of normalized coordinates which is the one reported here what you can do here is to replace the multiplication between the matrix pi these coordinates directly with the lambda multiplied by the normalized coordinates. So you can replace this term by lambda X, Y, 1 and from this relation, what you get is exactly the desired relation between fixed coordinate and the normalized coordinates. So you have Xi, Yi, 1 equal to the Sigma matrix, which is the matrix with the intrinsic parameters multiplied by x, y, y. So what do we do? What we do in our analysis is to assume that we measure the coordinates of the points in the image plane. Because remember, our goal now is to understand how we can use just information coming from images. okay so it means that what we see are just points in the image plane we can measure the coordinates of these points in the image plane and just by inverting this relation you can get the corresponding normalized coordinates instead of assuming that we have the pixel coordinates which are actually what you can see, let's suppose argument that is actually allows the points of interest where the corresponding normalizing coordinates, what you are to do to get the distro. This is just a tool for a disservice. Is that okay? So let's keep in mind- what's the unit for the vogel?? is it a millimeter? centimeter? It's so small that I don't know precisely what is the unit So this is the one we use. Maybe we can check it later. Depends, of course, on the camera. You have a big, is depends. I want to understand what is the focal length more precisely. That's why I ask, what is the, like how far is it? I don't have precise knowledge of that. We can check at the end of the day. Okay? This was just to build a common background. Okay? 


So we have seen that there are two possible ways to solve the problem when we have just information coming from the cameras, the problem is that, as usually you have a your end effect of your end effect of for instance from the start initial point has to reach a final point. Okay, but you have to solve this problem assuming that you receive just information from the camera. Actually, if you remember from what I said yesterday the case that we consider is that the camera is a solid with the robotic arm so this is the situation you have your end effector attached to the end effector you have the camera so the camera moves exactly with the end effector ok which means that the reference frame that you have on the camera and the frame the reference frame that you have attached to the end effector the relative pulse is constant because the camera is solid with the end effector, ok? I'm not saying that the axis of one reference frame is parallel to the axis of the other reference frame. I'm just saying that the relative pulse is a constant, ok? Because the camera is solid with the end effector. It is rotating and translating exactly in the same way. Is that ok? Ok. So keeping in mind that my mf has to go from an initial point to a final point. Here I have a camera. This camera keeps taking images. There are two solutions to my problem. I either I can use the images that the camera is taking to reconstruct the relative flows between the camera frame the Bazele frame which means that all the what I have just said that I'm reconstructing the relative pose between the reference frame of the camera with the reference frame of the Bazele. And if I pursue this path once I have reconstructed the relative pose between the end effector and the camera, I am done. Okay? Then I have reconstructed in some sense, the 3 dimensional position of that effector and so I can design my algorithms according to what we have already seen. Is that ok? This is the approach that we would like to discuss with you today. What I do is just to see how we can use information coming from cameras in order to reconstruct the relative pose, in this case, between the reference frame of the camera and the base reference frame OK otherwise but, we will discuss this maybe tomorrow is let's just work on the camera image plane that's the final network there let's see what we can do alternative to this first approach but what I want to do today is to discuss with you an analytical solution to the problem of reconstructing the relative pose between the reference frame attached to the camera and the reference frame attached to the base. If in the first class of computer vision that you have taken, for the ones who have taken this class this year the theoretical solution I am proposing here you don't study it in the computer vision class unless a professor changes the problem typically, it's taught in some other more advanced computer vision class but let's see the first idea what is the scenario you're considering? an object which is not moving is there, stuck and we have some important points over this object ok we have some algorithms which are able to detect the points a points detector you know, there are algorithms which are able to extract this important information ok? and what are the features that we consider? are the coordinates of these points of the image plane actually to be more precise our features are the normalized coordinates of a bunch of points which are defined on the object ok normalized coordinates with respect to the image plane of the camera. We will see point A is small. So actually what I solve as a first problem is to assume that also the object has a reference frame attached to it, okay? And we will see how we can reconstruct the relative pose the homogeneous transformation of coordinates between the reference frame attached to the object and the reference frame which is attached to the category. But since the object is not moving the relative poles between the base frame and the object frame is constant I can assume that I know it in advance Okay? So this should allow me by the end if I have the knowledge of the relative pose between these two reference frames also to reconstruct the relative pose between the frame attached to the camera and the frame attached to the object. But we will consider this at the end. First let's try to cast the problem where what I want to do is to reconstruct the relative pose between the frame attached to the camera and the framing attached to this object Is that ok?. Any question? I need to introduce some ingredients, some elements, in order to have all the important data to address this model. Ok, as I said the set of features parameters that we use here is a vector s is supposed to be k dimensional and we will see what I mean by k in this case. Is a feature vector. As I said, for a point in the image plane I consider its normalized coordinates in place of the pixel coordinates but once I measure this, I know how to get this since I am assuming to have the knowledge of the parameters of the camera so I know the matrix sigma just by inverting that the relation is a relation from these quantities which are actually the quantities that I actually I can obtain the normalized coordinates. I am using these normalized coordinates because for the method that I am teaching you which is used a lot as an analytical method the derivation of the analytical solutions are derived using using these coordinates making a bit easier the definition. Okay? This is just the reason why we use the normalized coordinates rather than the pixel coordinates. So what is the dimension of the feature vector for a point? Is it two-dimensional? Because I have just the couple of the normalized coordinates. So the feature vector for point is defined by x y is normalized coordinates of the image plane if you have n points what we do to get the feature factor is to cast the coordinates of each single point, so in this case the dimension of k would be twice n okay because if you have n points each point is 2 dimensional k will be 2n ok It will be useful later on to work instead with this description with the corresponding homogeneous coordinate that as usual obtaining and obtaining just adding one so S tilde is the 3 dimensional vector so we have the last function at least equal to one Okay? Okay let's start to build first of all all the elements that we had we need to pay a bit of attention to some important elements that we need to introduce and to discuss together Okay, I have already told you we have an object we have a reference frame which is attached to the object this reference frame is OOXOYO that OO stands for object then we have a reference frame which is attached to the camera OCXYY that C stands for camera TOC is what? Is the homogeneous transformation matrix which describes in a compact way the relative force that I have between the reference frame attached to the object and the reference frame attached to the camera. This is the standard notation that we have already seen the 4 by 4 matrix where here we have 0, 0, 0, 1 here I have the rotation matrix this accounting for the relative orientation between the frame attached to the object and the frame attached to the camera what do we have here? Here I have the elements accounting for the relative translation so I have exactly this vector is the vector joining the region of the camera frame with the region of the object frame which is the vector O-C-O is the vector going from the region on camera frame to the origin of object frame written with respect to what? The camera frame. Okay. Notice that subscripts are consistent with what we have seen so far. Is that okay? Perfect. Let's introduce other elements which are useful to our school. Oh, what is the vector? Oh, see, see, please don't tell me that this vector is just a discuss together. I mean, you need the last few guesses. Some students ask me, this vector is nu, No, let's understand that what is the notation that we are introducing in this class what is the meaning of this vector. what is OC? OC is the vector which joins the origin of the base frame because we are also third frame and is the base frame is the moral frame is the vector joining his origin with the origin of the camera frame Ok? look the visual this is the vector OC when I write also the subscript C What I mean is that I am describing this vector with respect to the camera frame. Okay? Because the temptation is to get in confusion because you think that this is big O which is the origin So the origin of the camera frame of the homogeneous is always 0,0,0 No, this is this vector the vector joining, this is more cool, is the vector joining the origin of the basic frame with the origin of the camera frame. And what I'm doing is correct the coordinates of this vector with respect to the camera frame. Is that okay? So it's like assuming that you pick this vector you translate it up to where this point coincides with this origin and you measure the coordinates with respect to the triplet of axis. That okay? What is OOC? First of all, the question is what is OO? OO is the vector joining the region of the base frame with the region of the object frame. And the coordinates of this vector are written with respect to the camera frame. Okay. Just a matter of understanding the notation Ok a-o-c is nothing but the notation matrix accounting for the relative orientation between the object frame and the current frame Is that ok? Ok notice that OCO is equal also to OO minus OC just exploit the standard vectorization Okay Let's go ahead so the problem that I want to address take this thing We don't have the time to see completely the solution. Let's start to pause the program to see some elements. I cannot compute the matrix TOC. So how can I compute this matrix? Starting from some information that now I describe to you so what I assume is the following we suppose to have some points here on the object ok what you can measure for this points that we have in the object is the corresponding normalized coordinates in the image plane right? so suppose that you have n points located here on the object for each point you can measure the corresponding normalized coordinate in the image of a line actually more precisely you can measure the corresponding pixel coordinates but we know that having the knowledge of the intrinsic parameters of the camera we can have the corresponding normalized coordinates Suppose that you have N points and you measure the corresponding normalize coordinates in the image plane for all these points. You have a fixture vector whose coordinate is twice N. Okay? The question that I pose is the following. How can I use this information? Or is it possible to use this information to reconstruct the matrix T O C? is that okay? So you have a point p1, which provides you x1, y1 as normalized coordinates. You have the point p2, whose normalized coordinates are x1, y1, up to having a point pn, whose coordinates, normalized coordinates are x and y So we have design points here to take a picture Okay. You have this set of elements which have information that you can measure Is it possible from this set of normalized coordinates to reconstruct the matrix T O C Okay, this is the problem that we want to solve. There are analytical procedures. So the problem is quite tough. The problem is quite tough and the solution depends not only how many points you have. Because when you want to quantify these metrics. How many numbers do you want to discover here? You have nine numbers in the rotation matrix plus the three numbers here. So you add up 12 elements that you have to calculate. Right? So it's clear that the one point is not enough. We need more than one point. Of course, but it's not just important how many points you have. It's important also to understand if the points are collinear, if they are on the same plane and so on. The problem is really interesting and really tough. There are analytical ways and we will see one under a particular assumption we assume just 4 points which are located on the same plane We see that this is enough to solve the problem. Okay? Four points on the same plane, but not collinear. Okay? Actually, not three points among the four can be on the same line. But there are also numerical strategies that allow you to compute this matrix, but we don't have the time to enter into the numerical procedures. I want just to show you an analytical solution which is in my opinion quite evident. Okay? Okay. So let's discuss that where this information comes from. That means in a more formal way. So our data into input are these elements, Because I know this but from the points which are located on the object I assume to have also the knowledge of the coordinates of these points with respect to the object frame. So I have also this additional information. So it's a combination of information of the position of these elements with respect to object frame, I can assume to have this knowledge in advance. You put an object in the environment, the object is there. Typically what you do is to take some points to put a strong color so the computer vision algorithms, abstract information, are working really well in detecting the points. You can assume to have the knowledge in advance of the coordinates of these points with respect to the object frame, okay? So it's the combination of this information with this information that you take in the image plane, which is the information that you take in real time that allows you to solve this problem in an analytical way. Let's describe more formally the information that we have. What is ORI? It's the vector joining the region of the object frame with a point i that I'm considering of the object. Okay? And we can describe this vector, ri in the object frame. Okay? This is what is the difference, and notice, so first of all, r of i, this vector, is the difference between the vector of A which is this vector minus exactly the vector joined point Pi with the origin of the base frame. Okay. So we can write exactly this relation assuming that you are measuring all the quantities with respect to the object frame. This doesn't matter. Okay. So this is our input information. we assume to have the knowledge of the coordinates a, o, i with respect to the object frame which means exactly to suppose that you know the coordinates of this red arrow with respect to the object frame is that ok? is the knowledge that they have in advance and suppose that we have n points located in the objects. So we have the knowledge of n vectors like this. Okay? Perfect for each of these point what I do is to measure the corresponding pixel coordinates in the image plane and to calculate the corresponding normalized coordinates for each pole i for which I know this coordinates I have also the knowledge of the corresponding normalized coordinates in the image plane x i y i I can build the overall vector s which is obtained stacking all the s i vectors one over the other so S is given2 vector of S1 up to Sn. Okay. So formally speaking, the information that I have in order to compute TOC is the information given by the n vector r or r o and the feature vector that I have here. Okay. Let's see what I can do with this information in order to solve analytical speaking our work. Okay, no doubt about the variability of this relation, right? So if you want to write the coordinates of the vector R O I with respect to the camera frame, what we can do is to use this relation. Okay, so our i c is equal to the matrix t o c, i o t. So here is the knowledge of this vector, but I don't have the knowledge of the vector t o c which is the one that I want to compute. But let's use this relation let's use this relation this is the relation that I have about what? this is the relation that I have about the normalized coordinates Okay? let's look together This is the relation that we saw basically during the last slide of the previous set of graphs. Let's pick a point i. Here I have this normalized coordinates So I can write some lambda i multiplied by Si tilde, okay? So for the point i, I have the corresponding normalized coordinate SI. SI tilde is the normalized description where I have the third component equal to one, okay? Equal to what? The matrix pi, okay? Here, what I have, notice what you have here are the coordinates of the point i with respect to the camera frame, right? So, inside this description of coordinates that you have the coordinates to go back to this line of this point with respect to the camera frame which are exactly this coordinates inside this coordinates exactly in writing the coordinates of the point Pi with respect to the camera frame Okay? So what I can do is to exploit in order to substitute this vector, which is roi tilde c by the corresponding vector t of c, roi tilde o. Is that okay? So now I have this relation, with which I want to play in order to reconstruct the information inside the matrix t of c. Is that clear? What is not clear? It's late. Sorry? It's late. It's late. Not my fault. Let's try to go back to understand what is the problem. So any problem with these relations, this is the definition of normalized coefficients. We have to accept it, right? Let's consider the height point. So here, if I consider this elevation, this is elevation for a point, a generic point. Let's make particular this relation for the height point. Okay. So what you have here is xi yi 1, xi yi are the features of point i, which is the vector si. If I add the third coordinate 1, here I have si. Let's put a generic lambda i, which actually inside lambda i, we have the third coordinate of the point I with respect to the camera frame Okay? Now we need to understand just a bit better this vector Is this quite clear? Let's consider this what I have here are the coordinates of point I with respect to the camera frame Okay? So let's go back to our image This is point I Inside Pxc, Pyc, Pzc what I have are the coordinates in this case of the specific point I with respect to the camera frame, okay? But I know the coordinates of this point with respect to this frame. But I can relate the coordinates of this point with respect to frame or the object with the coordinates of point I with respect to the camera frame using the homogeneous transformation coordinates t or C. Is that okay. I hope it is a bit better. So this vector when we consider the height, the height point is this vector because inside this vector I have the coordinates of the height point which is here with respect to this. Let me use this relation in place of this point, which is written like this, let me write directly this and then I have this relation. why I like this relation because here inside the same relation I have the entire knowledge which is at my disposal because of the left, and the cider I have the feature vector, which is the vector that I measure. On the right-hand side, I have the knowledge that I have a priority about the i-th point. Okay? So here you have n relation like this, And from this end relation, you will have to see if it is possible to compute these metrics. It's a bit more clear. So it's a program. We are input data. And we are the output data which are the data that we want to reconstruct. This is what we have in our hands. And with this knowledge, we want to reconstruct this. Since it is late, just a few more minutes at least to caster the problem to start to understand what is the direction we take and tomorrow we will finish. Okay? Just a comment. This solution of this problem, which needs to compute the TLC from this set of relation in the literature is called the perspective and point the problems that the NP problem. I don't know if you are seeing these in computer vision. There are for sure other computer vision class more advanced where you can study this problem. As I said, tomorrow I will start from this. According to how many points you have, the natural numbers that you have, there are different situations, Okay? We will focus on the problem where you have four points, Where the four points are coplanar, but not ripples of collinear points are present among the four points, Okay? We will see that in the case where all the points are on the same plane. Let's go back to our image here. Suppose that you have this solid if you take all the four points on this face of the solid this is a suitable case. The important thing is that if you pick any triple dot points more than four points these three points are not collinear and not on the same line. Under this assumption, we can see that the solution of this problem is unique. So you can determine in a perfect way the homogeneous transformation matrix how to solve the problem. We will do a lot of manipulations, but it takes too time, we are too tired, so we will conclude tomorrow the solution of this problem. And then we start also to introduce the part that related to the visual cell. So in the case where I want to solve my problem directly in my joint, there is a delay. Is that ok? So let's meet tomorrow at the same time, which is too late. I agree with you, but we don't have any other way. Maybe tomorrow we will make the break, ok?