--- [Parte 1/7 • 00:00 - 14:11] ---

Good morning, everyone.

Okay, any, do you have any question?

Who was able to install ROS in his machine? Okay. Who is not up and running with the ROS installation, either on his machine or in VLAB? Does anyone have troubles with VLAB? Is it working now? Okay. Who did not complete the exercise in the lab the other day? So, you had to finish by printing every two seconds something in the node we created together. Who didn't print yet, let's say? Just one, two, three? Okay. Okay, because next Thursday we are going to see message passing between two nodes, so be sure you are able to create one node, okay, and to give a look to to what we did last Monday last Thursday.

And so, yeah, and so that we can start from having one node working, and adding another node, and we start seeing the message passing between the nodes and the topic, okay? If you have any trouble with your machine or with the ROS installation, just send a message to the forum that is open and it will be running.

Okay.

Okay, so the last lecture we saw what's a what is a robot, okay, so we gave a formal definition, and we saw different type of robots, and we saw that these okay, that these have different despite having different shapes and different applications, that we saw that they they can be described by one simple definition, and that they have something in common, okay, that they need three elements to be called robots. And this is common to every kind of robots that that we can imagine, okay?

Yes. Yes.

Ah, yes, you're right. The microphone.

Okay, can you see the copy? Okay.

Okay, so in the end we saw we saw we saw that the the classical approach in which robots are designed is what is called the sense-plan-act paradigm, okay? And that, so dividing the perception part from reasoning part and from the action part. Actually, as we saw in at the end of the lecture, this approach works very well if you can just manipulate symbols. So, this is the approach motivated from artificial intelligence, okay? So from the original problem solving approach of for of symbolic artificial intelligence. But this showed this approach, this paradigm, is called, showed its limitation when applied to the robots. And this, and the reason for this, is the fact that the robot is not acting in a symbol-based world, so it's not just manipulating symbols, but it's acting in the real world. And so, with entities that are not fully described by symbols, but and also that can modify their states without any other action. And this is even more compelling when applied to human-robot interaction. So, if the robot is not acting only in the world, but is also interacting with a human, either offering services to a human, so the the robot is closing the loop on the human, in the sense that is delivering something to the human, or is helping the human in some work, and so it has to take into account also the variation of activity of the human, but even more when the human is in the loop, and so when the human can give commands to the robot, can interface directly with the robot, and so the robot is not only closing the loop in the human, but the human is fully inside the loop of the control of the robot. And we we will see that this this consideration call for a new approach in the software for controlling the robot, that is called hybrid systems, okay?

But let's go step-by-step, and so let's understand how robots are changing, okay? And how this new paradigm is changing not only the way we program robots, but also the way robots are built, okay?

So, you might remember from high school that so far we had three industrial revolutions, no? And and so during the course of history humans discovered new technologies or created new technologies and this changed the way of producing goods, okay? So we had a prehistoric revolution with with the invention or the usage of tools, stones, metals, and all that. And then we had three industrial revolutions. The first one the first one was the one about the mechanization of manufacturing, okay? So the the power to create goods, in the sense of the force to create a good, to smash, hammer, or to to to create fiber and stuff like that, fabric and stuff like that, was no longer given by humans, but or animals, but it was given by either water or steam, and so the invention of the steam engine, okay? That was applied not only to trains or cars, but also to loom, and so to production, okay? So the first industrial revolution is this capability to use power coming not from animals, either us or the donkey going around in a circle to move a a mill, okay? Or or a milling machine, but instead the use of motors or mechanical things to convert the power of water or heat or steam into a useful a useful work, okay? For again for production.

The second industrial revolution is about mass production, okay? So the idea that if you you you are able to automate some part no, sorry, the the idea that instead of building everything from scratch, you could separate the work of creating something into separate phases, okay, so and each of the worker that was doing that job

--- [Parte 2/7 • 14:09 - 28:22] ---

was specializing on that phase. So, it's very famous the first production chain for the for cars by Henry Ford that introduced the assembly line in in the production of the cars. But actually, the idea of a production chain is much earlier and it dates back of the end or the middle of 1800 when a a butcher in but I don't remember if Philadelphia or Pittsburgh now, okay, in a city in an American city, realized that instead of having one animal disassembled by a single butcher, it was much faster if everyone of the butcher working in the company was just working on a separate part of the animal. And the animal was hanging on hooks from on on a rail and moving the animal through the people processing the the body of the animal in order to take out all the meat pieces that were useful. In this way, people stayed steady and the goods were moving in front of the people and the production was much faster because every employee employee was specializing on a single task. This idea was taken also to industrial manufacturing. So, instead of having artisans creating every piece from scratch like a chair starting from a a a trunk of wood and creating every single leg and every single pieces of the chair, it's it's much more efficient to have people specialized in a single task and assemble the goods all together. At a certain point, when most of the production was well separated into single phases, okay, because every worker was performing one one phase, we realized that some of these phases could be automatized, could be we could substitute the humans with machine to performing certain tasks. Why to substitute the humans with machine? First, because in some operations we had machines that were stronger and more precise and more repetitive than the human and this was was able to increase the quality of work. But on the second hand, also there were many jobs that were too dirty or too dangerous for humans to be to perform. One example is in the mid the 60s in Turin in Italy in in Fiat, the the car company in Italian car company in Turin, there were a sector of the of the firm of the factory in which there was a big turnover of people. People worked there for maybe five years or six six years and then they leave. And this was the the the the sector of the of the of the of the factory in which they were spraying a special paint under the the bottom of the car that is called the in Italian is antirombo is in English anti-sound or sound-absorbing paint but it's a it's a special paint to reduce the noise of the of the exhaust of the car. But the reason why people were moving away from that sector of the factory was because they died and the the the workers in that sector were often getting sick because this paint they were using was poisoning and so this was one of the first sector in which they introduced machines in order to save life of of of the worker, okay? Nowadays, we we are we, I mean industries, are trying to automatize more and more phases not to save life of the workers but because they it's difficult for them to find workers, to find employees. Less and less people are willing to work in the production line, especially in the western countries, and so companies try to automate production in order to have a continuous production even despite the fact that few people are working there and people that are there are going to retired because no young employees are taken. Okay, so in the first no, in the middle of 1970s, we had this big revolution that was the idea of automatizing some parts of the production and how? Using electronics and so this new technology that was that made possible to process data and to control actuators and and robots that were able to move around objects. So, we have the blooming of the industrial robotics in this period. But this this specific use of robots was very limited in the sense that the robots employed in the production were robots that were replicating always the same actions. So, thanks to the electronics and to the PLC, was possible to program this robot to perform certain actions but these actions were always the same, were always were repetitive and they were not flexible. So, at a certain point, companies tried to make production more flexible, okay, and to make robots self-reconfigurable and self-programmable, okay? Why? Because the the market is changing from mass production to personalized production. So, the dream of every company is to be able to create a single product in a automatic way. So, what I mean is that in order to have a plant that is automatized with robots, you need to program all these robots and this takes and to build the the robot workspace and this takes many money, many many time and big investments. In order to recover from this investment, the payback of this investment, you need to produce a lot of goods, a lot of goods that are all the same, all equal because if not, you have to change the programming again and if the good change a lot, you have also to reconfigure the work cell in which the robot is working. So, current robotics is good for industry 4.0 but it's not flexible. Okay, nowadays customers want something specific. So, everyone of you wants a a bottle, a water bottle of different color, of different shape and so company wants more flexibility. And so we created this term that is industry 4.0 to mean that the factory is able to reconfigure itself, that the production can change in a single way and in order to achieve this, we need robots, we need machines, we need devices that are connected one with the other, so that have communication capabilities, that can communicate with the monitoring system of the factory and so is what we call the smart factories in which the factory itself can take or the system supervising the factory can take decisions and change the way things are produced. And we limit that you can interact you as the customer can interact with directly with the factory by placing your order maybe through your mobile or through the website of the factory and your order is automatically processed by the factory and you can choose to have your bottle or your car pink or yellow and the robots in the production line will take the right bottle of of ink in order to make the color we want in a fully automatic way. This term industry 4.0 is worth to mention that is the first revolution that we claimed before that it happened. What do I mean? I mean that nowadays we do not have factories that are fully automated in this way, okay? So, we have machines that are connected to the cloud or to the central monitoring system of the company and and even in the most advanced factories not even all production machine are connected but for sure we do not have fully automated factories. And and so we are we created this term, the fourth industrial revolution or industry 4.0 just to describe an idea while the other three industrial revolution were recognized after they happened. Okay, so economists looking back at the history, they said, ah, okay, at that time there was something that changed the the way of producing in the next coming years. Okay, at that time the assembly line was a a great idea and many companies changed the way they were producing goods, okay? While this one is somehow a new term, something a revolution that we created before it happened, okay? So, when you hear this, think about think about this fact that the fourth industrial revolution is just claimed but is not an historical an historical fact. So, this is the main difference between this revolution and the previous ones. But for sure, in order to have to to to put in to make real this fourth revolution, we need many different things in the factory. It's not enough to have autonomous the automatic robot, it's not enough to have automation and robotics but we need these robots for sure to be connected with the rest of the devices in the factory. So, we need other technologies like internet of things, so every machine can interact and communicate with the rest of the factory, with the rest of the machine and of the supervising system. We need big data in the sense that all this become effective when all the data about production are processed, are analyzed and so the factory can the factory

--- [Parte 3/7 • 28:20 - 42:33] ---

the supervisory software detect a way of improving the production or can detect problems before they they happen. An example of this is predictive maintenance. So in predictive maintenance just collecting data from the production you are able to understand that one machine will have a problem and so one motor will stop and so probably is better to buy a new motor and by the time the the the supplier send you the new motor you can prepare the production for a short stop of the production, switch the motor before it breaks and then start again. Much better than having a motor that abruptly blocked the machine and all the rest of the production for maybe a week that is the time it takes for the motor to come for the new motor to come from the supplier, okay? But having all these things connected pose also a challenge of cyber security so companies need to be prepared to be secure and to have also access to the cloud. But this is not all I mean automatizing is not enough because you need also human machine interfaces. So you need a way for humans supervisor to monitor the production to understand what is going on because if these guys are all talking among them but we don't understand what they are saying every time there is a malfunctioning we don't know how to to put how to solve where to to put our hands, okay? So is not to be forget the fact that the human has always to be in control of what is going on. And another technology that is changing the way of producing is additive manufacturing for sure it is something that is worth to mention in industry 4.0. I I leave you this I put for you in the slide this infographics summarizing the main points of the four industrial revolution, okay? So one could think that the the fourth industrial revolution brings humans out of of the of the factories. So when the fourth industrial revolution was proposed or forecast people were afraid that they will lose their jobs that we will not have any longer humans in the production and so what will the human do? Actually this is not true this didn't happen why? Because people who try to create what are called dark factories did not succeed. What are dark factories? Dark factories are companies that are fully automated okay so following the principles of industry 4.0 are companies that are fully automated so humans are not needed and so they are called dark factories. Can you guess why? Why factory okay but dark why dark? Sorry? Yes and yeah no humans are around so no need for artificial light no need for even natural light okay. So machines have their own sensors many times they are active sensors so they do not rely on external lighting and so it's pointless to have to spend money on lights. In the same way you can save also money on the heating system because again machines don't need to work at 20 degrees I mean some cases for machines is even better to work at 10 degrees. Okay so if you are able to fully automate an industrial plant you save money also on the lighting and on the heating. But every company that tried to do that even Tesla gigafactories maybe 10 years ago Elon Musk was claiming that they will build gigafactories without any human operator they never succeeded. Why? The reason is that robotics is not mature enough to manage all the complexity of a production line okay in the sense that certain operations cannot automatize yet or are not how can we say are not profitable to automatize. Even our mobiles or our laptop that are very compact very that use a very precise requires a very precise assembly and all that actually are not created just by machines but humans are manipulating all the not would but many of the of the faces I mean human manipulation is required in many of the faces of the production of of the phone like a tablet is touched at least 200 times during production by a human and even in the more automatized factory. And this is because some quality inspection task some insertion task are difficult to be performed by machine and so we need human expert to do that. Another issue with dark factories is being able to cope with the unforeseeable so a situation that is not forecast by the designers of the dark factories cannot be solved by the machines. Okay so these machines maybe can avoid obstacles these robots these moving robots can avoid obstacles but if for instance a cat sneak into the factory they don't know how to catch the cat they don't know what even what the cat is and so the cat can create a big mess because no one no no no one no machine is able to cope with something that was not reviewed by by the plant okay. Not to mention the fact that the machine itself they can broken and the other machines are not able to take care of the machine that break okay so if this wheel stop functioning this robot maybe will end in the middle of the corridor and the other robots cannot pass and so the whole plant will stop. So again the importance of human monitoring and human robot human machine interface in order to understand what is going on and to be able to to to recover from faulty situations. So what's the solution? The solution is to use collaborative machine collaborative robots so to have people working side by side with robots okay so to increase the automation but always having human in control and having machine that can interact with humans. And this is the paradigm of collaborative robotics and in which robots are not substituting humans but are but are helping or supporting humans in their job either providing a supernumerary limb so providing help while the human is doing the job or providing the force to by supporting heavy pieces and so the human do not have to I mean the human do not have to lift these heavy weights that can create many problems at the human joints but also that enable the companies to retain workers even in their late years so experienced workers that maybe are getting old 55 60 65 and so they cannot lift anymore heavy objects if supported by a robot they can use their experience without risking their bodies. In this example this was a European project in which we participated and this is the assembling of a plane this is the internal panel this is the window of the plane okay so it's the internal panel of the cabin in which passengers are and these are big metal panels panels that are hanged to the support structure of the plane and as you see in this project the robot was moving inside the the fuselage of the plane and carrying these panels and then you see the robot is lifting the panel and so is unifying the gravity and so the weight of the panel and the human is guiding the robot in order to match the right hooks to hang the panel to the fuselage. You see this is an example of human robot collaboration in which the each of the two agents is using his best skill in order to help the other one or in order to complete their task. So the human is using his flexibility and his perception in order to find the correct position of the panel in order to hang it to the hooks and also is using his flexibility in the perception because he's fine behind the panel while the robot is using his force his capacity of staying steady even for a long time supporting the panel and so the human is precisely guiding the panel without the need of perception of the robot so for the robot to perceive the hook behind the the panel would be very difficult. In this case the robot just perceive the forces that the human is putting on his end effector on his arm okay. And so this brought to a new term okay so even before having achieved industrial 4.0 revolution before having achieved the fourth industrial revolution we started to speak about the fifth industrial revolution why? Because we realize that the fourth industrial revolution maybe was born blind was born in a bad way was not solving all the issues. So what does it mean? It means that it was missing a central point the central point was the human okay. If you remember we said that putting to the stream or putting to completeness the fourth industrial revolution would have removed the human from from the production plants. Actually the especially the European Union push a lot on instead of this new idea that the production should have the should be human centric in the sense that the

--- [Parte 4/7 • 42:31 - 56:43] ---

uh production lines should be uh designed taking into account humans that are working there. And so should be designed for the not only to increase the production, not only to increase the economical return of the production lines, but uh to increase the well-being of the workers, okay? And so the idea was that using new technologies with like robotics, internet of things, perception, nowadays AI, we can create new way of producing, but uh this will create new jobs and jobs that people are willing to do because uh they are uh jobs which people uh stay healthy and in which people are let's say happy to to work, okay? Uh and how is this achieved? For sure by uh design the production process to be human-centric. That means uh uh think about all impacts that the the kind of production and the job that is required has on the human operator, okay? And on the other hand, uh because this idea came after COVID, uh it was also driven this uh industry 5.0 uh by another two pillars that are sustainable and resilient. Okay, resilient in the sense that the production should be able to cope with um disruption uh disruptions either in the supply chain, so if goods are not coming from the Far East, can we produce anyway? Do we have alternative of uh supplies? And uh on the other hand, sustainable in the sense that uh the production should be environmentally friendly and should be able to work with resources that we already have without exploiting uh our planet, okay? So especially European Union push a lot on this idea of industry 5.0 and new research project, new um plants that uh get funding from governments and from the European Union have to implement this this vision, this direction, okay? So this is changing also robotics. So this is a classical example of an industrial plant uh with robots working in it, okay? This is a classical 3.0 industry. What uh what do you see in this picture? Let's see what uh you notice in the picture. Name things that uh are evident for you and uh what is the first thing that you notice in this picture when you look at it? Yeah, okay, robotic arms. And one thing is that we have multiple robotic arms, okay? In this production plant uh we have uh at least five robots that are working on in the same um in the same work cell, okay? So they are working all together at a certain production step and uh and so they are programmed, they are synchronized to work all together, okay? So we have an issue of synchronization between the different machine and so for sure they are communicating with one with another. Maybe in this case even in a simple way via a PLC. Anything else you notice? Exactly, there is no human and uh this is the paradigm of industry 4.0. Okay, humans are not allowed to stay in the working area of the robots, in the working space of the robots, okay? Do you notice something else? Yeah, this is something that even kids in the primary school is the first thing that they notice usually uh because uh this is a question I pose also to in the to students in the primary school when I go teaching about robotics there and they always notice the sparks. Very nice and uh yeah, probably this is a welding stage of the car. What else? Exactly, this was the point. There are fences, you see? All the yellow fences around the the working area, around the um the robots. So not only humans are not present close to the robots, but by law, by the uh machine law, okay, that is the directive uh for building automatic machine, robots must be closed within a cage, okay? And the cage must have just one door for maintenance, so you can enter only from one point, and this door has must have a handle that is connected to what? Exactly, a power switch. So it's not connected to a computer controlling the robots, it's not connected to a signal that send an interrupt to the program controlling the robot and the robot controller stops the robot, but the handle is connected to the power switch. So it's connected to the electrical power supplying all the robots. So this is a maximum protection, okay, and is required by law to have to set up the system in this way. So when you open the gate, when you open the the the door, let's say when you open the cage, so you open the gate that is the door of the of the cage, you are not stopping the program, you are switching off, turning off the um the electricity, the power of the of the work cell. And why is this? For safety reason. But why is so important that uh the robot stops? Exactly, because these robots do not have sensors to detect people, so they are programmed to go from point A to point B, okay? And so whatever happened between point A and point B, they don't care. They they are not able to perceive it. Okay, so if a person is between point A and point B, the robot will move anyway and so will hit the person and with the mass they have and the speed they move, they can hurt very badly uh the the person that is in the middle. So these are automatic machine but with very little perception and very little um not I would say without any reasoning capability reasoning capabilities but with very little perception, okay? On the other hand, we have collaborative robots, okay, that are what are meant to be in industry 5.0, okay? Uh I like this picture that was taking at a at a fair. Why? Because it's the exact opposite opposite of the previous picture. Okay, this is a robot in production, so is assembling uh goods that are on the table. Obviously, this is a demo at a fair, it's not a production line. But the nice thing is that people are all around the robot and are very close to the robot and even people that are not technicians for sure. This guy know a little bit about robotics, but this little girl for sure doesn't know anything about robotics, but it's safe for her to stay there and she can interact with the robot thanks to sensors mounted on the robot and you see also the human-machine interface that is conveying information to the human to what the robot is doing. So for instance, these lights uh show that the robot is in cooperative mode and the yellow that is detected the people and the display with uh these eyes are is turning in the direction to which the robot will perform the next action. So it's like eye contact or eye gaze direction and so you can guess when the robot will move by looking at the fake eyes of the robot, okay? Um this guy is um Rodney Brooks that is the father of modern robotics. We will study how Rodney Brooks um just after his PhD in in the mid mid '80s uh created a revolution in robotics by introducing what is called behavior-based robotics. But Rod is also a a a a a a a startup, let's say. He created many startups. Uh the first one, not not not the first, I'm not sure, but the most successful one is iRobot that is the startup who made Roomba, okay? Uh that was the first massive uh robot uh not massive, the first robot for the mass market, okay? This robot instead was another startup that he created that was Rethink Robotics uh that was trying to uh create a revolution not only in mobile robotics as iRobot did, but also in industrial robotics uh by creating this collaborative robots. Unfortunately, this second startup was not as successful as iRobot and so it bankrupt uh few years later without really impacting the uh the the the the market of industrial robotics, but many of the ideas they introduced with uh Baxter, this two-arm robot, collaborative two-arm robot, are still alive and are shaping the new generation of collaborative robots. Okay, so uh the point is that this robot is has is fitted with a lot of sensors can so can detect the people and can uh act can move its actuators in a safer way for people surrounding them, okay? But how we came to collaborative robots? Uh if we look at the history of robotics, okay, at the evolution of robotics, that's why this these slides, if you notice the title, are called the revolution of robotics in the sense that uh the written in the first uh okay, it's written only on the name of the file. Okay, the revolution of robotics. What they mean is the fact that we understand the evolution of robotics over the year with this graph and then uh we see how this create a revolution, a new revolution. So

--- [Parte 5/7 • 56:41 - 01:10:56] ---

and new revolution. So, robotics created one or two industrial revolution but is changing robotics as well. So, as we said in the first slide, the idea of robotics, of robots, so of machine that can help humans or can work in place of humans is old as the human mind. Okay? This idea of creating something that can help us during the day. But how to implement this was a different story. Okay? We saw that only after the Second World War we were able to we developed the technology to create automatic or autonomous machines. Okay? This is the history that you find inside your book, the Introduction to AI Robotics of Professor Robin Murphy. She is a professor in US, she is an American, a professor in US. And if you want this recap of the history of robotics is a bit too US-centric and so is reflecting mostly the evolution of robotics in US. But because US was one of the big innovator and one of the force driving the evolution of robotics over the years, this for sure this might not be totally true for European robotics or for Japanese robotics and nowadays even for China robotics that is very new. But nevertheless many many of the things she put in the book are very interesting and somehow influenced also robotics in the rest of the world. So, the starting point is that this idea of robots in order able to support human or in order to perform jobs or work in the place of humans was driven by American industry. And after I mean in between the 50s and the 60s there were too many sorry, two major forces or two major industries that were interested in the development of robotics. One was the nuclear industry. So, an industry in which manipulating the objects were very dangerous. Okay? If you have to manipulate plutonium or uranium, this is very difficult to touch. I mean if you have a human moving plutonium or uranium, it needs a big shield and it can work just for few minutes in that environment. If not, the dose of radiation that he will absorb is too high. So, these industries had the need to have remote manipulation. So, to have a device that can manipulate the nuclear active elements but with humans supervising this from a far distance, from a safe distance. Okay? So, one big interest was for the nuclear industry, not only the military industry but also the civil nuclear industry that was creating industrial nuclear plants for the production of energy electricity. And the other force that drove the robotics was space exploration. Since the beginning NASA realized that astronauts in space were very limited in their motions and in what they could perform and so they immediately understood that having a machine supporting them, a robot supporting them would be very helpful. Maybe in a robot walking on the moon or a robot working in the space. Okay? So, there were two different trends or two different pushes for robotics that created a separation. From one side there were industries interested in to see robots as tools. Okay? So, precise tools, tools that can be controlled remotely or that could be even autonomous at a certain point but are tools for producing something. And this was driven by the nuclear industry as we said or the heavy industry in which they wanted some manipulation capabilities, some moving capabilities independently from humans that were not able or were not allowed to do it. On the other end is that we had the and this was the force to drive the development of industrial robots. On the other end we had instead application or interests toward an intelligent agent. So, to have a robot that was acting in the environment and helping the human in the open environment. So, who was more an agent rather than a tool. And this was the driving force for mobile robotics. Okay? Here you have many on the timeline you have many examples of successful robots either in one or in the other timeline and then you have also the evolution of drones. Okay? How the idea of autonomous flying agents behaved and you see also that on the timeline you have both application of let's say not nuclear but military industry industries or space exploration. Okay? And how this shaped the robotics. This let's say this separation between the two these two approaches were not in place was not in place only for industries and so you had industries specialized in industrial robots and industries creating by robots and so on. But it was but it created a separation also in the research communities. So, we have scientists that are more interested in robots as a tools, so how to make them very precise, how to make them very repetitive, how to make them very reliable and so on. And scientists more interested instead on intelligent robots and so how to make them smart, how to make them flexible, how to cope with unpredictable and things and stuff like that. And this is true also nowadays. So, we have two communities that for two scientific communities that for many years were separated and were developing its own research line. But lately both community reached a certain level of maturity. Okay? So, not only the community but also the industries in the two sectors reached a level of maturity that required the full term of these two technologies. So, even in our department if you had a chance to look at this, we have a group in robotics that is the group of that is working on intelligent robots, so it's working on intelligent agents and so that is more interested in AI for robotics. And the other group that is more related to industrial robot that is the control system group that is more looking at the robots as a tools and so more from the point of view of controlling these precise devices, these precise tools. But as I said in both technology evolved and now are mature. If we look at the first installation of an industrial robot, this dates back on 1959 in which this company, the first robotics company called Unimation that stands for Universal Automation that was created a few years before, so in 1956 by George Devol and Joseph Engelberger Engelberger. Sorry, Unimation was the name of the company, Unimate is the name of the first robot. And as you see it was the first programmable robot, it was programmed in joint coordinates and it was meant for the heavy industry for for moving pieces coming out of a furnace. Okay? And at that time it was programmed on a magnetic drum. Okay? We had no RAM memory, we had no computers with microprocessor and stuff like that. Okay? But nowadays robotics is very industrial robotics is no, where is the link? No longer working. Okay, let me open YouTube. Okay. So, okay, so nowadays you can if you need a fast robot, you can you can go out in the market and buy a fast robot. Okay? This was an example of this was an example of how fast let's see this is another example yeah, of fast machines. Okay? Fast and precise, you see that it has a superhuman precision and speed in sorting objects of this size. So, if you need a reliable machine, you can buy you can spend more and buy a machine, a robot with a fault every million hours or stuff like that. If you need a strong machine, you can go out and buy a big robot that can lift 250 kilos and if you need to lift 500 kilos at once, you can just you can just buy two machines. Okay? So, the field is very mature and so the the innovation curve comes to arrived to a saturation. Okay? So, innovation is slower and slower because they already reached the peak of the technology. What is missing? It's missing flexibility. Okay? So, what the industry is now the industrial robotics is now trying to introduce is flexibility. But nevertheless let me stop the meeting. Nevertheless industrial robotics is still increasing and evolving. You see the trend of installation per year are slowing down, are not growing as fast as in the past. Especially in Europe and in the US the the figures are almost stable. Okay? The the growth of new installation of industrial robots are very

--- [Parte 6/7 • 01:10:54 - 01:25:08] ---

very small, while in Asia and Australia, but actually is Asia driving this this trend, we had years of big growth and now also there is a certain saturation, but this means that in 2024 402,000 of robots were installed in companies and they were industrial robots. This is this plot shows the the big investments of China in robotics in order to manufacturing to automate the production of the goods of their companies. You saw you see here that the US, because America is dominated by US market, slow down and lately started to come back and the same Europe. These are actual figures from World Robotics that is the report of the International Federation of Robotics that is collecting and creating the statistics every year. This is the last available report. And if we look at the biggest market, you see that for sure is China with 350 354,000 units installed in 2025. By a large amount we have second United States and then Japan and the first European country is Germany with 24.8,000 units and after Germany we have Italy, France, Spain, okay? This is to give you figures about what means China in the industrial robotics market with respect to Germany, to Italy, but also to the US that are much bigger. If you take Europe as one economy, you say that you see that it's over US by almost the double and so the European industry is investing a longer in in robotics, okay? Which kind of market or which kind of production these robots are are working on? Less and less in automotive, okay? Automotive, as it was in my slide, was one of the biggest driver for the growth of the robotics because creating cars with robots is very effective and cars are let's say cars are all similar if you want, so every model of the cars has in order to be successful has at least 1 million pieces produced in just at least 1 million pieces and so robotics is a good solution for that market. But during the years the number of installation you see in the automotive is diminishing and so is no longer the biggest market. The biggest market is electrical and electronics assembly, okay? But other markets are coming in the sense that metal and machinery market is more and more present as a new installation and this is because industrial robots are becoming more flexible, are becoming more intelligent, okay? We are adding sensors to industrial robots and so they can perform jobs that were reserved in this market to humans and so replacing putting a piece in another machine, taking out the piece of the machine, controlling the piece is something nowadays industrial robot can do and so markets that were forbidden to robotics now are I mean robots are enabled to work in that market thanks to the fact that they are more flexible and more intelligent. One of these market is food production, okay? Food production we always think that is made with human hands, but actually is growing growing the automation in food production and is a market that is increasing with respect to them, okay? But we said that the other part of robotics is intelligent robots. So where does intelligent robots starts? We can say that it starts with artificial intelligence. Robotics was always considered one application of artificial intelligence and as I said because we need also different paradigms with respect to artificial intelligence robotics is part also of the not let's say a part of the artificial intelligence community is working in in robotics. Who doesn't know the famous Dartmouth conference of the 1956? Who doesn't know? Okay, just two, three, four, few people. So this was the first conference in which people gathered to think about intelligent computers. What does it means? It means that until 1950, the year 1950 computers were just machines that were doing what? What? Computation, calculation, math, okay? What does computer mean in English? It means to compute, to do simple operation, okay? So computers were developed to calculate the trajectories of missiles, to make a simulation, to to solve equation and all that. By the way the the first computers were not machines. Who were they? Who knows that? Who were the first computers? No one? To make clothes? To make clothes? No. No, no, they were people. The term computers was a job for people, okay? Who knows the story? No one seen the movie? So? Yeah, it was a job either in military in the in the US Army. So you had people whose job were to do calculation, so scientists or engineers wrote the equation and then they hand in the piece of paper to another person saying okay, solve the equation, do me the calculation, calculate the integral, calculate the logarithm for this number or whatever. Most of the time they were women because they were more focused and attentive than men at this job and probably at that time they were paid even less and there is a famous movie famous movie that is called if I'm not wrong in English is The Power to Count or something like that. That is about the history of a group of women, black women working at NASA for doing all the calculation for the space exploration and tells the story of this job of being a computer in NASA. But in 1950 so so at a certain point when when built the first computers and we had the Mark II and all the computers that were built, they were meant to do calculation and so they were called computers. But what happened in 1950? Who remembers? Student who studied artificial intelligence? At the bachelor and maybe at the master. What happened in 1950? It was the year in which a scientific paper was written or published. There is another couple of famous movies about this. One is Enigma. This is a hint to solve the Enigma. 1950 Do you remember a famous person alive in 1950 in computer science? Alan Turing. Alan Turing in 1950s published a seminal paper, seminal scientific article that is Can Machines Think, okay? So the idea that machines that computers were not only to be meant to do calculation but could also do some reasoning, thinking or whatever you want to call. So they could be used to solve usual problems, everyday life problems, okay? Or to do deduction, to do logic, to do problem solving, okay? And and six years later this idea started to circulate in the scientific community, so they in the US MIT decided no sorry, it was Stanford decided to organize a conference on the idea that this proposal of Alan Turing that machine could think. So they gave the in charge the young PhD student that was John McCarthy at that time to organize the conference and to set up the the leaflet for the conference and John had the brilliant idea of instead of calling it symposium on the computational ability of machine in order to understand if they can solve formal logic, he thought this title was boring and so he came out with this term artificial intelligence. So 1956 is the first year in which we use the term artificial intelligence, okay? So artificial intelligence was born and these were people participating in this in this conference that were the most famous mathematician, computer engineers and the fathers of informatics and information engineering, okay? So starting from 1956 people started to think how computer can solve everyday problems and in Stanford in in the late 60s they created the first mobile robots that mobile robot that was able to go around by itself and to move from one room of the other of the of the department. This was called Shakey because the machine when moving was always shaking because you saw you see it had this tall antenna

--- [Parte 7/7 • 01:25:06 - 01:39:19] ---

at least a tall antenna and heavy cameras and heavy TV cameras, so analogic cameras on top of of of of of this support in order to transmit the images to a big computer, big remote computer. But so because it was shaking while moving, it was called Shaky. And this was the first mobile robot that could do some autonomous action and so you could send a message to Shaky and tell it to go to a certain room and it will navigate through the corridor, okay? By planning its action and by doing perception and world modeling in order to successfully reach the target. This over the year become this, so nowadays even robotics, even mobile robots are a solved, if you want, a solved problem in the sense that we have robots that can go around in a unstructured environment, they can detect obstacles, they can avoid obstacles and successfully perform very fast, okay? And and so even this technology and even this market we can say it's mature. But as I said, these two markets I know, I have also some some statistics also for service robots, for mobile robots going around and not being fixed in a position in the company. You see the numbers are not so high as industrial robots, but appear they are increasing and so nowadays service robots are a blooming market and are more and more a an economical reality, okay? So Okay, and these figures are just about professional service robots, so they're not taking into account consumer robots. So in these figures are not all the vacuum cleaner, are not all the drones that you can buy by yourself, okay? The interesting thing is that the market of professional service robots are dominated by transportation and logistics, almost half of the market, and then professional cleaning and then hospitality means meaning moving goods in hospitals and in in hotels and stuff like that, okay? But okay, and other smaller smaller market. But these two markets nowadays are a solid market for the What is happening is this reunion of technologies. So we have the industrial robots that became a mature technology. Nowadays you can buy an industrial robot for every application, okay? For every solution, for every task you have a solution. You can buy autonomous robots or mobile robots that are more and more effective, more and more intelligent and but that are missing what? They are missing the precision, the repeatability, the reliability of industrial tools. Industrial tools are missing the flexibilities and the reasoning of industrial robots. And the union of these two technology is moving to the collaborative robot market, okay? So it's creating a new generation of robots that are what I was saying, robot that are safe for human because they can detect humans, they have sensors on their joints or on their wrist or on their even skin, you will see. And but they at the same time they are the precision and the reliability of industrial robots. And what are the advantages in in particularly for small and medium enterprises and so for new markets for robotics? The first is reduced cost and reduced footprints. Okay, so reduced cost because these robots are cheaper than industrial robots in general and also because you don't need protective fences, that is a big part of the cost of a robot installation because every industrial robot need a working area dedicated to itself and design for the robot itself. So the cost of the machine is just a fraction or a part of the total cost of a plant, of a working area of the robots because you have a lot of cost in the design of the safety, in the design of the fixture or in the design of the area in which the robot is operating. Instead, collaborative robot can operate on the same table on which the human operator is working. And so this reduced cost but it's reduced also footprint, so they reduce space. If you have industrial robots you need big big mall, big buildings to to have the space to put all these robots, to put all this this production line. By using collaborative robot humans and robot can stay close to each other, robots can work in smaller environments and so you save space. As I said, collaborative robots nowadays are just a niche, okay? They are just 10% of the global robot market, so 90% of the global robot market is dominated by industrial robots, but they are growing fast. They are every year they are increasing by 20%, so collaborative robots are more and more effective. Nowadays with the new advances of AI, collaborative robots have more and more capabilities. We have a reasoning system that can work with these robots, we have vision system that can have richer perception and also the reasoning capability are getting better. But currently AI doesn't have safety, cannot generative AI, as you know, cannot provide the safety standards that are used that are required in the industry, okay? So the application of generative AI or chatbot or LLM to these task is somehow slowed down by the safety requirements of that this technology cannot guarantee. So big effort is put in trying to improve safety for this machine. You might be curious why we didn't speak so far. The reason is that this is the answer that the company was given to my question the other day. We had a meeting with the company that was asking to us, should we buy humanized robots in which area should we exploit humanized robots? Do you have are you practicing with it? And my question was, how many robots do you have in your company in production in your company? They answer 150. I said good. And how many of these robots are collaborative? Ah, no one. Why? Because collaborative robots are much slower than industrial robot, they are less precise and so for many production they are the the return of investment is not worth, okay? So substituting an industrial robot with a collaborative robot reduce the speed of the production. And so I said so look, you have 150 industrial robot and zero collaborative robot. Why would you put a humanized robot that is like collaborative robots but without any reference point because it's on on feet, okay? And so it's moving and so it doesn't even know where it started to work, okay? So humanized robot are a new technology that is just a niche of a niche, so in the whole world probably were sold about 7,000 units thinking of full-size humanoids, these numbers, okay? They are interesting because they are claimed to be full of sensors and to have a new control system that can show very dexterous motion but and also they are claimed to be connected with AI and so to solve everything with AI as AI is solving everything in our life and also that they can operate in human in environments that are designed for humans, but but we don't know anything about reliability, okay? With very little humanoids can show repeatability and precision in their motion and we don't know anything about safety standards, okay? And yeah, the first barrier for adoption of humanized robots is their limited their limited manipulation capabilities because many of them are exhibiting hands with lot of freedom, but the capability of putting the fingers in a certain position is not enough to ensure manipulation because manipulation human manipulation is relying a lot on touch, temperature sensors that we have, pressure sensors that we have in the finger and the capability to process all these informations at once. So just having the capability of moving the hand is not enough, okay? So that's why most of the claim that comes about humanized robots are just commercial, are just marketing, but are not a reality at the moment. So this again comes these figures, this text comes from the International Federation of Robotics that that suggest to distinguish potential from commercial maturity, okay? So there is some potential, some companies are trying to gain experience with these humanized robots, so they are buying the robots and putting trying putting them in production, but if they are effective is something that we don't know and we will discover in the future. Okay, thank you very much for the attention.